Understanding Power

Understanding Power

The Indispensable Chomsky

Explanatory footnotes available at WWW.
understandingpower.com

Edited by Peter R. Mitchell and John Schoeffel

•
THE NEW PRESS

NEW YORK

© 2002 by Noam Chomsky, Peter Rounds Mitchell, and John
Schoeffel
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form, without
written
permission from the publisher.
Published in the United States by The New Press, New York,
2002 Distributed by W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., New
York
Explanatory footnotes available at
www.understandingpower.com
ISBN 1-56584-703-2
CIP data available
The New Press was established in 1990 as a not-for-profit alternative to the
large, commercial publishing houses currently dominating the book
publishing industry. The New Press operates in the public interest rather
than for private gain, and is committed to publishing, in innovative ways,
works of educational, cultural, and community value that are often deemed
insufficiently profitable.
The New Press, 450 West 41st Street, 6th floor, New York, NY
10036 www.thenewpress.com
Printed in Canada
19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10

Contents

Editors' Preface
A Note on the Events of September II, 200 I
Chapter One

XI
XIlI

Weekend Teach-In: Opening Session

1

The Achievements of Domestic Dissidence

I

The U.S. Network of Terrorist Mercenary States

4

Overthrowing Third World Governments

6

Government Secrecy

10

The Media: An Institutional Analysis
__ Testing the "Propaganda Model"

12
15

- The Media and Elite Opinion

18

Chapter Two

Filters on Reporting

24

Honest Subordination

30

"Fight it Better"; the Media and the Vietnam War

31

Teach-In: Over Coffee
"Containing" the Soviet Union in the Cold War

37
37

Orwell's World and Ours

41

Contemporary Poverty

45

Religious Fanaticism

50

'The Real Anti-Semitism"

51

Ronald Reagan and the Future of Democracy

53

Two New Factors in World Affairs

58

Democracy Under Capitalism

60

The Empire

64

Change and the Future

67

Chapter Three Teach-In: Evening
The Military- Industrial
Complex The Permanent War
Economy

70
70
73
v

vi

Contents

Chapter Four

Libyan and American Terrorism

77

The U.S. and the U.N.

84

Business, Apartheid, and Racism

88

Winning the Vietnam War
"Genocide": the United States and Pol Pot
Heroes and Anti-Heroes

90
92
93

"Anti - Intellectualism"

95

Spectator Sports

98

Western European Activism and Canada

101

Dispelling Illusions

103

Colloquy

106

The Totalitarian Strain

106

A Lithuania Hypothetical

109

Perpetuating Brainwashing Under
Freedom
Journalism LeMoyne-Style: A Sample of

II
I

the Cynical Aspect

115

Rethinking Watergate

117

Escaping Indoctrination

120

Understanding the Middle East Conflict
The Threat of Peace

123
126

Water and the Occupied Territories

129

Imperial Ambitions and the Arab Threat

131

Prospects for the Palestinians

134

Legitimacy in History

135

Qualifications to Speak on World Affairs; A

137

Presidential Campaign
Chapter Five

Ruling the World

140

Soviet Versus Western Economic
Development
Supporting Terror
"People's Democratic Socialist Republics"

140
144
145

Contents
vii

Chapter Six

The Organ Trade
The Real Crime of Cuba

146
148

Panama and Popular Invasions

151

Muslims and U.S. Foreign Policy

154

Haiti: Disturbance at an Export Platform

155

Texaco and the Spanish Revolution

159

Averting Democracy in Italy

160

P.R. in Somalia

163

The Gulf War

165

Bosnia: Intervention Questions

171

Toying With India

172

The Oslo Agreement and Imperialist Revival

174

Community Activists

177

Discussion Circle

177

The Early Peace Movement and a Change
in the l970s

180

The Nuclear Freeze Movement

184

Awareness and Actions

186

Leaders and Movements

188

Levels of Change

189

Non-Violence

193

Transcending Capitalism

195

The Kibbutz Experiment
196
"Anarchism" and "Libertarianism"

199

Articulating Visions

201

"Want" Creation

203

Dissidents: Ignored or Vilified

204

Teaching About Resistance
Isolation

211
212

Science and Human Nature

214

Charlatans in the Sciences

217

Adam Smith: Real and Fake

221

The Computer and the Crowbar

223

viii

Contents

Chapter Seven Intellectuals and Social Change
The Leninist/Capitalist Intelligentsia
Marxist "Theory" and Intellectual Fakery

224
224
227

Ideological Control in the Sciences and
Humanities

Chapter Eight

231

The Function of the Schools

233

Subtler Methods of Control

238

Cruder Methods of Control
The Fate of an Honest Intellectual

242
244

Forging Working-Class Culture

248

The Fraud of Modern Economics

251

The Real Market

255

Automation
A Revolutionary Change in Moral Values

258
260

Popular Struggle
Discovering New Forms of Oppression

267
267

Freedom of Speech

268

Negative and Positive Freedoms

272

Cyberspace and Activism

276

"Free Trade" Agreements

280

Defense Department Funding and "Clean Money" 284
The Favored State and Enemy States

286

Canada's Media

288

Should Quebec Separate from Canada?

291

Deciphering "China"

282

Indonesia's Killing Fields: U.S.-Backed Genocide 294
in East Timor
Mass Murderers at Harvard

298

Changes in Indonesia

299

Nuclear Proliferation and North Korea

301

The Samson Option

303

The Lot of the Palestinians

305

P.L.O. Ambitions

310

The Nation-State System

313

Contents
ix
Chapter Nine Movement Organizing
The Movie Manufacturing Consent
Media Activism
Self-Destruction of the U.S. Left

Chapter Ten

31 B
318
323
326

Popular Education

331

Third-Party Politics

333

Boycotts
"A Praxis"

337
339

The War on Unions

339

Inner-City Schools

342

Defending the Welfare State

344

Pension Funds and the Law

346

Conspiracy Theories

348

The Decision to Get Involved

351

"Human Nature Is Corrupt"

355

Discovering Morality

356

Abortion

358

Moral Values

359

Turning Point
Bringing the Third World Home

363

Welfare; the Pea and the Mountain

367

Crime Control and "Superfluous" People
Violence and Repression
International Capital; the New Imperial Age
The Fairy Tale Economy
Building International Unions
Initial Moves and the Coming Crisis
Elite Planning-Slipping Out of Hand
Disturbed Populations Stirring
The Verge of Fascism
The Future of History
Index

363
370
373
377
382
383
387
390
395
398
400
403

Editors' Preface

This book brings together the work of one of the most remarkable political activists and thinkers of our time. The discussions span a wide array of
topics-from the workings of the modern media, to globalization, the education system, environmental crises, the military-industrial complex, activist strategies, and beyond-and present a revolutionary perspective for
evaluating the world, and for understanding power.
What distinguishes Noam Chomsky's political thinking is not anyone
novel insight or single overarching idea. In fact, Chomsky's political stance
is rooted in concepts that have been understood for centuries. Rather,
Chomsky's great contribution is his mastery of a huge wealth of factual information, and his uncanny skill at unmasking, in case after case, the workings and deceptions of powerful institutions in today's world. His method
involves teaching through examples-not in the abstract-as a means of
helping people to learn how to think critically for themselves.
The opening chapter introduces two themes that underlie nearly every
aspect of the book: the progress of activism in changing the world, and the
role of the media in staving off that activism and in shaping the way we
think. The book follows a roughly chronological order, and begins with
four discussions that took place in 1989 and 1990-the dawn of the postCold War era. These first chapters lay a foundation for Chomsky's subsequent analysis. The remaining chapters explore more recent developments
in U.S. foreign policy, international economics, the domestic social and political environment, as well as activist strategies and problems. The book
and its accompanying footnotes bring Chomsky's analysis right up to the
present day.
The internet has enabled us to place extensive documentation in our
footnotes, which appear at the book's website. These vast online notes go
well beyond mere citation to sources: they include commentary on the text,
excerpts from government documents, significant quotations from newspaper articles and scholarship, and other important information. Our goal was
to make accessible much of the evidence supporting each of Chomsky's
factual assertions. The notes also add additional depth for those interested
in a given topic.
The complete footnotes-which are longer than the text itself-can be
easily downloaded from the book's website, www.understandingpower.com
x
i

xii

Editors' Preface

(they can also be accessed through www.thenewpress.com). Information
about obtaining a bound printout of the notes is available on the website, or
by writing us in care of the publisher.
The book was put together as follows. We transcribed tapes of dozens of
question-and-answer sessions, edited them for readability, then reorganized
and combined them to eliminate repetition and present the analysis in a
coherent progression of topics and ideas. Our aim was to compile an
overview of Chomsky's political thought that combines the rigor and documentation of his scholarly books with the accessibility of the interview format. Always we remained faithful to Chomsky's own language and
answers-and he reviewed the text-but it was necessary to make superficial
alterations for structural and stylistic reasons.
Most of the material is from seminar-style discussions with groups of
activists, or from question periods after public talks, held between 1989
and 1999. Some of the answers in chapters 6, 7, 8 and 9 are taken from
conversations between Chomsky and Michael Albert. Questioners are
identified as "Man" or "Woman" because frequently this device reveals
when the same person is pursuing a line of questioning, or whether
somebody else has taken over.
We have personally checked and verified the sources cited in the footnotes, except for certain foreign language materials. Most of the sources are
those Chomsky relied upon when making his comments in the text, but
some are not. Emily Mitchell's assistance in retrieving reams of this material in the final months of our work on this project was invaluable. We direct readers to footnote 67 of chapter 1 for discussion of one common
misunderstanding regarding the footnotes: that the frequent citation to articles from the mainstream media is at odds with the "Propaganda Model"
of the media, which Chomsky outlines in chapter 1.
We want to thank our parents-Emily and George Mitchell and Ron and
Jone Schoeffel-whose support made the book possible.
-The Editors

Note on the Events of September 11, 200 1

As this book was going to print, hijacked airplanes hit the World Trade r
and Pentagon, killing thousands and potentially triggering major
repercussions in U.S. society and in the world. The U.S. media devoted
huge rage to the attacks and their aftermath. But, overwhelmingly, the
media omitted a critical, accurate discussion of the context in which they
occurred.
When President Bush and U.S. officials announced that "America was
targeted for attack because we're the brightest beacon for freedom and opportunity in the world," the mainstream media in the U.S. mostly echoed :
refrains. A lead analysis in the New York Times stated that the perpetrators
had acted out of "hatred for the values cherished in the West as freedom,
tolerance, prosperity, religious pluralism and universal suffrage." Glaringly
missing from the U.S. media's coverage was a full and realistic account of
U.S. foreign policy and its effects around the world. It was hard ;0 find
anything but a passing mention of the immense slaughter of Iraqi
civilians during the Gulf War, the devastation of Iraq's population by U.S.instigated sanctions throughout the past decade, the U.S's crucial role in
supporting Israel's 35-year occupation of Palestinian territories, its support
for brutal dictatorships throughout the Middle East that repress the local
populations, and on and on. Similarly absent was any suggestion that U.S.
foreign policy should in fundamental ways be changed.
This book was compiled before the events of September 11,2001. But
answers to many of the most important questions presented by those attacks
will be found here. Why does the media provide such a limited and
uncritical perspective, and such inaccurate analysis? What is the basis of
U.S. foreign policy and why does it engender such widespread hatred of the
U.S.? What can ordinary citizens do to change these situations?
As Chomsky noted right after the attacks, "The people in the advanced
countries now face a choice: we can express justified horror, or we can seek
to understand what may have led to the crimes. If we refuse to do the latter,
we will be contributing to the likelihood that much worse lies ahead." From
our frightening, current vantage point, the discussions collected in this book
seem more urgent than ever. We hope that the book will provide a starting
point for understanding, and will contribute to the critical debates-and
changes-that must now occur.
xiii

2

Teach-In: Over Coffee
Based primarily on discussions at Rowe,
Massachusetts, April 15-16, 1989.

"Containing" the Soviet Union in the Cold War
WOMAN: Dr. Chomsky, it seems the terms of political discourse
themselves are a tool for propagandizing the population. How is language
used to prevent us from understanding and to disempower us?
Well, the terminology we use is heavily ideologically laden, always. Pick
your term: if it's a term that has any significance whatsoever-like, not "and"
or "or"-it typically has two meanings, a dictionary meaning and a meaning
that's used for ideological warfare. So, "terrorism" is only what other people
do. What's called "Communism" is supposed to be "the far left": in my
view, it's the far right, basically indistinguishable from fascism. These guys
that everybody calls "conservative," any conservative would turn over in
their grave at the sight of them-they're extreme statists, they're not
"conservative" in any traditional meaning of the word. "Special interests"
means labor, women, blacks, the poor, the elderly, the young-in other
words, the general population. There's only one sector of the population that
doesn't ever get mentioned as a "special interest," and that's corporations,
and business in general-because they're the "national interest." Or take
"defense": I have never heard of a state that admits it's carrying out an
aggressive act, they're always engaged in "defense," no matter what they're
doing-maybe "preemptive defense" or something.
Or look at the major theme of modern American history, "containment" as in, "the United States is containing Soviet expansionism." Unless you
accept that framework of discussion when talking about international affairs
in the modern period, you are just not a part of accepted discourse here:
everybody has to begin by assuming that for the last half century the United
States has been "containing" the Soviet Union.
37

38

Understanding Power

Well, the rhetoric of "containment" begs all questions-once you've accepted the rhetoric of "containment," it really doesn't matter what you say,
you've already given up everything. Because the fundamental question is, is
it true? Has the United States been "containing" the Soviet Union? Well,
you know, on the surface it looks a little odd. I mean, maybe you think the
Soviet Union is the worst place in history, but they're conservative
whatever rotten things they've done, they've been inside the Soviet Union
and right around its borders, in Eastern Europe and Afghanistan and so on.
They never do anything anywhere else. They don't have troops stationed
anywhere else. They don't have intervention forces positioned all over the
world like we do.1 So what does it mean to say we're "containing" them?
We've been talking about the media and dumping on them, so why not
turn to scholarship? Diplomatic history's a big field, people win big prizes,
get fancy professorships. Well, if you look at diplomatic history, it too is in
the framework of "containment," even the so-called dissidents. I mean,
everybody has to accept the premise of "containment," or you simply will
not have an opportunity to proceed in these fields. And in the footnotes of
the professional literature on containment, often there are some revealing
things said.
For example, one of the major scholarly books on the Cold War is called
Strategies of Containment, by John Lewis Gaddis-it's the foremost scholarly study by the top diplomatic historian, so it's worth taking a look at.
Well, in discussing this great theme, "strategies of containment," Gaddis
begins by talking about the terminology. He says at the beginning: it's true
that the term "containment" begs some questions, yes it presupposes some
things, but nevertheless, despite the question of whether it's factually accurate, it still is proper to adopt it as the framework for discussion. And the
reason why it's proper is because it was the perception of American leaders
that they were taking a defensive position against the Soviet Union-so,
Gaddis concludes, since that was the perception of American leaders, and
since we're studying American history, it's fair to continue in that framework.2
Well, just suppose some diplomatic historian tried that with the Nazis.
Suppose somebody were to write a book about German history and say,
"Well, look, Hitler and his advisors certainly perceived their position as
defensive"-which is absolutely true: Germany was under "attack" by the
Jews, remember. Go back and look at the Nazi literature, they had to defend
themselves against this virus, this bacillus that was eating away at the core
of modern civilization-and you've got to defend yourself, after all. And they
were under "attack" by the Czechs, and by the Poles, and by European
encirclement. That's not a joke. In fact, they had a better argument there
than we do with the Soviet Union-they were encircled, and "contained," and
they had this enormous Versailles debt stuck on them for no reason after
World War I. Okay, so suppose somebody wrote a book saying: "Look, the
Nazi leadership perceived themselves as taking a defen-

Chapter Two

39

sive stance against external and internal aggression; it's true it begs some
questions, but we'll proceed that way-now we'll talk about how they defended themselves against the Jews by building Auschwitz, and how they
defended themselves against the Czechs by invading Czechoslovakia, how
they defended themselves against the Poles, and so on." If anybody tried to
do that, you wouldn't even bother to laugh-but about the United States,
that's the only thing you can say: it's not just that it's acceptable, it's that
anything else is unacceptable.
And when you pursue the matter further, it becomes even more interesting. So for example, in this same book Gaddis points out-again, in sort of a
footnote, an aside he doesn't elaborate on-that it's a striking fact that when
you look over the American diplomatic record since World War II, all of
our decisions about how to contain the Soviet Union, like the arms buildups, the shifts to detente, all those things, reflected largely domestic economic considerations. Then he sort of drops the point.3 Well, what does that
mean? What does Gaddis mean by that? There he's beginning to enter into
the realm of truth. See, the truth of the matter, and it's very well supported
by declassified documents and other evidence, is that military spending is
our method of industrial management-it's our way of keeping the economy
profitable for business. So just take a look at the major declassified
documents on military spending, they're pretty frank about it. For example,
N.S.C. 68 [National Security Council Memorandum 68] is the major Cold
War document, as everybody agrees, and one of the things it says very
clearly is that without military spending, there's going to be an economic
decline both in the United States and world-wide-so consequently it calls
for a vast increase in military spending in the U.S., in addition to breaking
up the Soviet Union.4
You have to remember the context in which these decisions were being
made, after all. This was right after the Marshall Plan had failed, right after
the post-war aid programs had failed. There still had been no success as yet
in reconstructing either the Japanese or Western European economies and
American business needed them; American manufacturers needed those
export markets desperately. See, the Marshall Plan was designed largely as
an export-promotion operation for American business, not as the noblest
effort in history and so on. But it had failed: we hadn't rebuilt the industrial
powers we needed as allies and reconstructed the markets we needed for
exports. And at that point, military spending was considered the one thing
that could really do it, it was seen as the engine that could drive economic
growth after the wartime boom ended, and prevent the U.S. from slipping
back into a depression.s And it worked: military spending was a big
stimulus to the U.S. economy, and it led to the rebuilding of Japanese industry, and the rebuilding of European industry-and in fact, it has continued
to be our mode of industrial management right up to the present. So in that
little comment Gaddis was getting near the main story: he was saying, postwar American decisions on rearmament and detente have been keyed

40

Understanding Power

to domestic economic considerations-but then he drops it, and we go back
to talking about "containment" again.
And if you look still closer at the scholarship on "containment," it's even
more intriguing. For example, in another book Gaddis discusses the
American military intervention in the Soviet Union right after the Bolshevik
Revolution-when we tried to overthrow the new Bolshevik government by
force-and he says that was defensive and that was containment: our invasion of the Russian land mass. And remember, I'm not talking about some
right-wing historian; this is the major, most respected, liberal diplomatic
historian, the dean of the field: he says the military intervention by 13
Western nations in the Soviet Union in 1918 was a "defensive" act. And
why was it defensive? Well, there's a sense in which he's right. He says it
was "defensive" because the Bolsheviks had declared a challenge to the
existing order throughout the West, they had offered a challenge to Western
capitalism and naturally we had to defend ourselves. And the only way we
could defend ourselves was by sending troops to Russia, so that's a
"defensive" invasion, that's" defense." 6
And if you look at that history in more detail, you'll find the point is even
more revealing. So for example, right after the Bolshevik Revolution,
American Secretary of State Robert Lansing warned President Wilson that
the Bolsheviks are "issuing an appeal to the proletariat of all nations, to the
illiterate and mentally deficient, who by their very numbers are supposed to
take control of all governments." And since they're issuing an appeal to the
mass of the population in other countries to take control of their own affairs, and since that mass of the population are the "mentally deficient" and
the "illiterate"-you know, all these poor slobs out there who have to be kept
in their place, for their own good-that's an attack on us, and therefore we
have to defend ourselves.? And what Wilson actually did was to "defend
ourselves" in the two obvious ways: first by invading Russia to try to
prevent that challenge from being issued, and second by initiating the Red
Scare at home [a 1919 campaign of U.S. government repression and
propaganda against "Communists"] to crush the threat that anyone here
might answer the appeal. Those were both a part of the same intervention,
the same "defensive" intervention.
And it's the same right up until today. Why do we have to get rid of the
Sandinistas in Nicaragua? In reality it's not because anybody really thinks
that they're a Communist power about to conquer the Hemisphere-it's
because they were carrying out social programs that were beginning to succeed, and which would have appealed to other people in Latin America who
want the same things. In 1980 the World Bank estimated that it would take
Nicaragua ten years just to get back to the economic level it had in 1977,
because of the vast destruction inflicted at the end of the Somoza reign [the
four-decade Nicaraguan family dictatorship ousted by the Sandinista
revolution in July 1979]. But nevertheless, under the Sandinista government
Nicaragua was in fact beginning economic development: it was

Chapter Two

41

establishing health programs, and social programs, and things were starting
to improve for the general population there.8 Well, that set off the alarm
bells in New York and Washington, like it always does, and we had to stop
it-because it was issuing an appeal to the "illiterate and mentally deficient"
in other desperate countries, like Honduras and Guatemala, to do the same
thing. That's what U.S. planners call the "domino theory," or the "threat of a
good example," and pretty soon the whole U.S.-dominated system starts to
fall apart.9
Orwell's World and Ours
Well, all of that is within the rhetoric of "containing" Communism and
we could easily go on. But there's one word. You look at any other term of
political discourse, and you're going to find the same thing: the terms of
political discourse are designed so as to prevent thought. One of the main
ones is this notion of "defense." So look at the diplomatic record of any
country you want-Nazi Germany, the Soviet Union, Libya, pick your favorite horror-story-you'll find that everything they ever did was "defensive"; I'm sure if we had records from Genghis Khan we would find that
what he was doing was "defensive" too. And here in the United States you
cannot challenge that-no matter how absurd it gets.
Like, we can be "defending" South Vietnam. I have never seen in the
media, never in thirty years that I have been looking carefully, one phrase
even suggesting that we were not defending South Vietnam. Now, we
weren't: we were attacking South Vietnam. We were attacking South Vietnam as clearly as any aggression in history. But try to find one phrase anywhere in any American newspaper, outside of real marginal publications,
just stating that elementary fact. It's unstatable.10
It's unstatable in the scholarly literature. Gaddis again, when he talks
about the battle of Dienbienphu, where the French made their last stand to
keep colonial control over Indochina, he describes it as a defensive struggle.
11
McGeorge Bundy, in his book on the history of the military system, talks
about how the United States toyed with the idea of using nuclear weapons
in 1954 to help the French maintain their position at Dienbienphu, and he
says: we were thinking about it to assist the French in their "defense" of
Indochina.12 He doesn't say defense against whom, you know, because that
would be too idiotic-like, was it defense against the Russians or something?
No. They were defending Indochina against the Indochinese.13 But no
matter how absurd it is, you cannot question that in the United States. I
mean, these are extremes of ideological fanaticism-in other countries, you
could at least raise these kinds of questions. Some of you are journalists: try
talking about the American "attack" on South Vietnam. Your editors will
think you came from Mars or something, there was no such event in history.
Of course, there was in real history.

42

Understanding Power

Or take the idea that the United States is supporting "democracy" all over
the world. Well, there's a sense in which that's true. But what does it mean?
When we support "democracy," what do we support? I mean, is
"democracy" something where the population takes part in running the
country? Well, obviously not. For instance, why are El Salvador and
Guatemala "democratic," but Nicaragua [i.e. under the Sandinista Party] not
"democratic"? Why? Is it because two of them had elections and the other
one didn't? No. In fact, Nicaragua's election [in 1984] was a hundred times
as good as any election in El Salvador.14 Is it because there's a lack of
popular political participation in Nicaragua? No. Is it because the political
opposition can't survive there? No, the political opposition is barely harassed in Nicaragua; in El Salvador and Guatemala it's just murdered.15 Is it
that there can't be an independent press in Nicaragua? No, the Nicaraguan
press is one of the freest presses in the world, much more so than the
American press has ever been-the United States has never tolerated a
newspaper even remotely like La Prensa in Nicaragua [opposition paper
supported by the U.S. during the contra war], not even close: in any time of
crisis here, the American government has shut down even tiny dissident
newspapers, forget a major newspaper funded by the foreign power that's
attacking the country and which is openly calling for the overthrow of the
government.16 That degree of freedom of the press is absolutely inconceivable here. In El Salvador, there was an independent press at one
time-it was wiped out by the U.S.-backed security forces, who just murdered the editor of one newspaper and blew up the premises of the other. 15
Okay, that takes care of that independent press.
So you know, by what criteria are El Salvador and Guatemala "democratic" and Nicaragua not? Well, there is a criterion: in Nicaragua [under the
Sandinistas], business elements are not represented in dominating the state
much beyond their numbers, so it's not a "democracy." In El Salvador and
Guatemala, the governments are run by the military for the benefit of the
local oligarchies-the landowners, rich businessmen, and rising professionals-and those people are tied up with the United States, so therefore
those countries are "democracies." It doesn't matter if they blow up the independent press, and kill off the political opposition, and slaughter tens of
thousands of people, and never run anything remotely like a free election all
of that is totally irrelevant. They're "democracies," because the right people
are running them; if the right people aren't running them, then they're not
"democracies." And on this again there is uniformity: try to find anyone in
the American press, anyone, who is willing to break ranks on the idea that
there are four democracies in Central America and one totalitarian state [i.e.
Sandinista Nicaragua] that never had a free election-just try to find one
statement rebutting that. And if the killings in El Salvador and Guatemala
are ever mentioned in the American press, they'll always call it "Death
Squads Out of Control," or "Extremists Out of Control." Now, the fact of
the matter is that the extremists are in Washington, and what they're

Chapter Two

43

controlling are the Salvadoran and Guatemalan militaries-but you'll never
find that in an American newspaper.
Or just take this phrase "peace process," which we hear all the time. The
phrase "peace process" has a dictionary meaning, it means "process leading
to peace. " But that's not the way it's used in the media. The term "peace
process" is used in the media to refer to whatever the United States happens
to be doing at the moment-and again, that is without exception. So it turns
out that the United States is always supporting the peace process, by
definition. Just try to find a phrase in the U.S. media somewhere, anywhere,
saying that the United States is opposing the peace process: you can't do it.
Actually, a few months ago I said this at a talk in Seattle, and someone
from the audience wrote me a letter about a week or so later saying he was
interested, so he'd done a little research project on it. He took the New York
Times computer database from 1980 (when it begins) up to the present, and
pulled out every article that had the words" peace process" in it. There were
like nine hundred articles or something, and he checked through each of
them to see if there was any case in which the United States was opposing
the peace process. And there wasn't, it was 100 percent. Well, you know,
even the most august country in history, let's say by accident sometime,
might not be supporting the peace process. But in the case of the United
States, that just can't happen. And this is a particularly striking illustration,
because during the 1980s the United States was the main factor in blocking
two major international peace processes, one in Central America and one in
the Middle East.I8 But just try to find that simple, obvious fact stated
anywhere in the mainstream media. You can't. And you can't because it's a
logical contradiction-you don't even have to do any grubby work with the
data and the documents to prove it, it's just proven by the meaning of the
words themselves. It's like finding a married bachelor or something-you
don't have to do any research to show there aren't any. You can't have the
United States opposing the peace process, because the peace process is
what the United States is doing, by definition. And if anybody is opposing
the United States, then they're opposing the peace process. That's the way it
works, and it's very convenient, you get nice conclusions.
MAN: Can I throw in another one? When you have a country which you
can't even pretend is a democracy-there's no constitution, no parliament,
there's an absolute monarch-you use the word "moderate. "
Yeah, "moderate" is a word that means "follows U.S. orders"-as opposed
to what's called" radical," which means" doesn't follow U.S. orders."
"Radical" has nothing to do with left or right; you can be an ultra-rightwinger, but you're a "radical" if you don't follow U.S. orders.
MAN: I have yet to see a single reference to Morocco's King Hassan as an
"absolute monarch." He has the worst human rights record in the Arab

44

Understanding Power

world, torture widespread, he invaded Western Sahara, disobeyed the
World Court, one of the nastiest characters anywhere-I have never seen an
article that didn't refer to him as a "moderate."19
That's right, because we have U.S. airbases in Morocco, and we get
plenty of minerals from there, and so on. Or just take Saudi Arabia-Saudi
Arabia is even described as "moderate" now.20 In fact, even Iraq is sometimes described as "moving towards moderation": Iraq is probably the worst
terror-state in the world-death camps, biological warfare, anything you like.
21

MAN: How about Suharto [Indonesian dictator]-he's called a "moderate"
too.
Suharto, yeah-that's the most extreme case I've ever seen, in fact, I'm
glad you mention it. This is a really astonishing one, actually. For example,
there was an article in the Christian Science Monitor a couple years ago
about the great business opportunities in Indonesia, and it said: after the
Indonesian government stopped a Communist revolt in 1965, the West was
very eager to do business with Indonesia's "new moderate leader, Suharto."
22 Well, who's Indonesia's "new moderate leader, Suharto"? Suharto is the
guy who, no doubt with the backing of the United States, carried out a
military coup in 1965 after which the Indonesian army slaughtered about
500,000 people within four months. Nobody knows the exact numbers-I
mean, they gave 500,000, pick your number; it was mostly landless
peasants.23
Well, that was very much welcomed in the West, the American media
just loved it. For instance, James Reston, the New York Times's liberal
columnist, had a column I remember called, "A Gleam of Light in Asia "things are really looking up. U.S. News and World Report had a story
called, "Hope Where There Once Was None." 24 These were the kinds of
headlines that were running throughout the U.S. press-and the reason was,
Suharto had wiped out the only mass-based political party in Indonesia, the
Communist Party, which had about fourteen million members at the time.
The Times had an editorial saying basically: it's all great stuff, but the
United States is right not to become too openly involved, because it doesn't
look too good to wipe out 500,000 people-but it's going the right way, let's
make sure it keeps going the right way. This was right at the time of the
massacre.25 Well, that's Indonesia's "new moderate leader," Suharto. This is
probably the most extreme case I've ever seen: this guy is one of the biggest
mass murderers since Adolf Hitler.

Chapter Two

45

Contemporary Poverty
WOMAN: Noam, I want to change gears for a moment if we could.
You've said that you were politically aware as a young kid in the 1930s-I'm
wondering, do you have any impressions of the differences between that
time and today, in terms of general outlook and attitudes? How would you
compare the two periods?
Well, the Thirties were an exciting time-it was deep economic depression, everybody was out of a job, but the funny thing about it was, it was
hopeful. It's very different today. When you go into the slums today, it's
nothing like what it was: it's desolate, there is no hope. Anybody who's my
age or more will remember, there was a sense of hopefulness back then:
maybe there was no food, but there were possibilities, there were things that
could be done. You take a walk through East Harlem today, there was
nothing like that at the depths of the Depression-this sense that there's
nothing you can do, it's hopeless, your grandmother has to stay up at night
to keep you from being eaten by a rat. That kind of thing didn't exist at the
depths of the Depression; I don't even think it existed out in rural areas.
Kids didn't come into school without food; teachers didn't have to worry
that when they walked out into the hall, they might get killed by some guy
high on drugs-it wasn't that bad.
There's really something qualitatively different about contemporary
poverty, I think. Some of you must share these experiences. I mean, I was a
kid back then, so maybe my perspective was different. But I remember
when I would go into the apartment of my cousins-you know, broken
family, no job, twenty people living in a tiny apartment-somehow it was
hopeful. It was intellectually alive, it was exciting, it was just very different
from today somehow.
WOMAN: Do you attribute that to the raised political consciousness of
that era as compared to now?
It's possible: there was a lot of union organizing back then, and the
struggles were very brutal. I remember it well. Like, one of my earliest
childhood memories is of taking a trolley car with my mother and seeing
the police wade into a strike of women pickets outside a Philadelphia textile
mill, and beating them up-that's a searing memory. And the poverty was
extreme: I remember rag-pickers coming to the door begging for money,
lots of things like that. So it was not pretty by any means. But it was also
not hopeless. Somehow that's a tremendous difference: the slums are now
hopeless, there's nothing to do except prey on one another.
In fact, a lot of life is hopeless today, even for middle-class kids. I mean,
for the first time in I think human history, middle-class kids now assume
they are not going to live as well as their parents-that's really something

46

Understanding Power

new, that's never happened before.26 My kids, for example, assume that they
are probably not going to live the way that we live. Think about it, that's
never happened before in history. And they're probably right, except
accidentally-like, some of them may, but on average they won't.
MAN: Do you have an explanation of what's happened to the cities?
I don't entirely understand it, to tell you the truth.27 You could see it beginning in the late 1940s-New York City, for example, started to become a
hostile place around then. I mean, as a kid when I would go to New York, I
would think nothing of walking through Central Park alone at night, or
walking along Riverside Drive by the river alone at night-the kinds of
things you wouldn't do now without a platoon of Marines around you, you
just took for granted back then; you didn't even give it a second thought.
You never thought twice about taking a walk through Harlem, let's say what
the heck, you know? But that all began to change after the Second World
War, and it changed throughout the whole United States: cities just became
hostile.
I mean, New York always had the reputation of being hostile, like there
were always jokes about the guy lying in the street and everybody walking
over him. But you just didn't feel that you were taking your life into your
hands and that people there were going to kill you, the sense you get when
you walk through a lot of the city today. And also, you didn't have the same
sense of super-wealth right next to grinding poverty-like today you see
people sitting at a fancy restaurant drinking wine, and some homeless person lying on the street right in front of them. There wasn't quite that kind of
thing either.
WOMAN: Is the change maybe related to the internationalization of the
economy, and the broadening of the super-rich class here?
Maybe. I really don't know, to tell you the truth, and I don't want to pretend that I know. But my feeling is, it's beyond just economics. I mean,
there were radical differences in wealth at that time, and people in the slums
were extremely poor-it's just that they weren't desolate.
WOMAN: It wasn't such a consumer culture at the time.
Yeah, certainly not to the extent that it is now-like, everybody didn't
have a television set where they were seeing some impossible life in front of
their eyes all the time. Although you had something like it, don't forget: in
those days the movies were what television is today; you'd go to the movies
for a dime, and that's where you'd get your fantasy world. And the movies
were all glitter, all upper-class fake glitter. But it just didn't have the same

Chapter Two

47

devastating effect, I don't know why. There's something really hopeless
about contemporary life that's new, I think.
MAN: The bomb had a lot to do with it.
Maybe-but does that really account for what happens in the slums?
Look, I mean, I never see much of it. In the late 1960s, I was with a mainly
white group, RESIST [a national draft-resistance movement], but we had
good contacts with the Black Panthers, and with them I did get into slum
areas. In general, though, I don't tend to see the slums very much. But from
the few times I've walked around poor areas of Harlem and other places like
that since then, I just can't recall anything remotely like it in the 1930s, even
in the poorest parts of Brownsville [a low-income section of Brooklyn].
Also, older friends of mine who've been teachers in New York since the
1920s tell me they think it's totally different today as well-kids were poor in
the Thirties, but they weren't rat-bitten.
WOMAN: For myself, as a radical who does a lot of political work in my
community, the despair is unbelievable-what we have to fight against at the
lowest rung is just incredible, I can really understand just giving up. Don't
you have some explanation of how we've come to this point?
Well, I think if you look over American history, you can point to at least
a few factors behind it. This is an immigrant society, and before the Depression virtually every wave of immigrants who came here was more or
less absorbed, at least the ones who wanted to stay-a lot of them didn't,
remember; in fact, the rate of return was rather high during the peak periods
of immigration.28 But for the immigrants who did stay, the United States
really was a land of opportunity. So, my father could come from Russia and
work in a sweatshop, and manage finally to get to college, and then see his
son become a professor-that stuff was real. And it was real because there
was a lot of manual labor around which could absorb the waves of
immigrants: people could work in sweatshops for sixteen hours a day and
make enough to live on, then accumulate a little excess, and things would
gradually start to get better. But in the 1930s, there was a big break in this
system-the Depression ended those opportunities. And the United States has
basically never gotten out of the Depression.
See, the post-World War II economic boom has been a different sort of
economic growth from anything that ever happened before. For one thing,
it's been basically state-funded and primarily centered in high technology
based industries, which are tied to the military system. And that kind of
economic growth just does not allow for absorbing new waves of immigrants. It allowed for it briefly during the Second World War, when there
was a labor shortage and people could come off the farms in the South and
work in the war industries. But that ended. And since then, the jobs have

48

Understanding Power

mostly been in high-tech or in the service sector-which is rotten, you don't
go anywhere. So there just aren't the same possibilities for people to move
up: if you can get into high-tech industry, you probably were there already,
and if you're working at sweeping the streets or something, that's where
you're going to stay.
Now, maybe that situation would have been livable if there hadn't been a
new wave of immigration, but there was. There was a huge wave of immigration. It happened to have been internal immigration this time, but
from the point of view of the society it was like a foreign wave: it came
from rapid mechanization of agriculture in the South, which drove the black
population, the former slaves, off the land. Then on top of that, there's also
been a major influx of Hispanic immigration. So you had these two big
waves of immigration coming up to the Northern cities, and nothing for
them to do: they couldn't do what my father did, because there wasn't the
same kind of manual labor going on which could occupy millions more
workers. So what in fact happened is these two huge waves of immigrants
were just herded into concentration camps, which we happen to call
"cities." And the vast majority of them are never going to get out-just because there's nothing for them to do. The economy simply is not growing; I
mean, the Gross National Product goes up, but it goes up in a way which
does not constitute economic growth for a poor urban population.
And with the decline of the traditional manufacturing industries in recent
years, it's getting worse, not better. As capital becomes more fluid and it
becomes easier for corporations to move production to the Third World,
why should they pay higher wages in Detroit when they can pay lower
wages in Northern Mexico or the Philippines? And the result is, there's even
more pressure on the poorer part of the population here. And what's in effect happened is they've been closed off into inner-city slums-where then all
sorts of other pressures begin to attack them: drugs, gentrification, police
repression, cutbacks in limited welfare programs, and so on. And all of
these things contribute to creating a very authentic sense of hopelessness,
and also to real anti-social behavior: crime. And the crime is mostly poor
people preying on one another, the statistics show that very clearly because
the rich are locked away behind their barricades.29
You can see it very clearly when you drive through New York now: the
differences in wealth are like San Salvador. I mean, I was giving a talk
there a little while ago, and as you walk around it's kind of dramatic: there
are these castles, and there are guards at the gate, and a limousine drives up
and the people go inside; inside I guess it's very elegant and beautiful. But
it's like living in a feudal system, with a lot of wild barbarians outsideexcept if you're rich, you don't ever see them, you just move between your
castle and your limousine. And if you're poor, you've got no castle to
protect you.
MAN: You mentioned drugs having an impact on the problem-I'm wondering whether you agree with the theory that drugs were maybe intro-

Chapter Two

49

duced to the ghettos intentionally, to try to demoralize people there and
keep them from coming together to organize to change things?
It's a good question-activists who work in the ghettos and slums have
been charging that for years. I mean, a lot of people have pointed out that
just at the time when you started to get serious organizing in the urban ghettos in the 1960s, all of a sudden there was this huge flow of drugs which absolutely devastated the inner-city communities. And the communities just
couldn't defend themselves against it: the parents couldn't do it, the
churches couldn't do it, you've got guys hanging around on street corners
giving ten-year-olds free drugs, and in a couple of months the neighborhood's gone. And the timing, in fact, was about when serious political organizing was beginning to take place. Beyond that, I don't know: maybe it
was planned, maybe it just happened.30 But I think you can make a good
case that the way the criminal justice system has been set up ever since then
does have a lot to do with social control.
So just take a look at the different prosecution rates and sentencing rules
for ghetto drugs like crack and suburban drugs like cocaine, or for drunk
drivers and drug users, or just between blacks and whites in general-the
statistics are clear: this is a war on the poor and minorities.31 Or ask yourself
a simple question: how come marijuana is illegal but tobacco legal? It can't
be because of the health impact, because that's exactly the other way
around-there has never been a fatality from marijuana use among 60 million
reported users in the United States, whereas tobacco kills hundreds of
thousands of people every year.32 My strong suspicion, though I don't know
how to prove it, is that the reason is that marijuana's a weed, you can grow
it in your backyard, so there's nobody who would make any money off it if
it were legal. Tobacco requires extensive capital inputs and technology, and
it can be monopolized, so there are people who can make a ton of money
off it. I don't really see any other difference between the two of them,
frankly--except that tobacco's far more lethal and far more addictive.
But it's certainly true that a lot of inner-city communities have just been
devastated by drugs. And you can see why people would want them-they do
give you a sense of temporary relief from an intolerable existence, whatever
else they might do. Plus I'm just convinced that by now a lot of the drug
stuff is around mainly because people can make money off it-so I don't
really think there's mu<:h hope for dealing with the problem without some
form of decriminalization to remove that incentive. It's not a pretty solution,
but it's probably part of the solution, I suspect. And of course, decriminalization doesn't have to mean no regulation-like, in England over
the years, they've tried to regulate alcohol through tax policies and so on, to
encourage use of more benign products like beer rather than more dangerous ones, and something like that could be looked into here. But obviously something should be tried, I think.

50

Understanding Power
Religious Fanaticism

WOMAN: Fundamentalist religion has really taken off in the last decade,
maybe as an outlet for some of this despair. Do you have any thoughts
about the significance of that development in the U.S?
It's pretty amazing what's happened, actually. There have been a lot of
cross-cultural studies of what social scientists call "religious fanaticism" not
people who just believe in God or go to church, but they're really kind of
fanatic about it, it's the kind of fanatic religious commitment that permeates
your whole life. And what these studies demonstrate is that this is a typical
characteristic of pre-industrial societies-in fact, it correlates very closely
with industrialization: as industrialization goes up, this kind of religious
fanaticism goes down. Well, there are two countries that are basically off
the curve. One of them is Canada, which has more fundamentalist commitment than you would expect given its level of industrialization. The
other is the United States-which is totally off the chart: we're like a shattered peasant society. I mean, the last study I saw of it was done in around
1980, and the United States was at the level of Bangladesh, it was very
close to Iran.33 Eighty percent of Americans literally believe in religious
miracles. Half the population thinks the world was created a couple
thousand years ago and that fossils were put here to mislead people or
something-half the population. You just don't find things like that in other
industrial societies.34
Well, a lot of political scientists and others have tried to figure out why
this aberration exists. It's one of the many respects in which the United
States is unusual, so you want to see if it's related to some of the others and
there are others. For instance, the United States has an unusually weak
labor movement, it has an unusually narrow political system. Think: there is
no other industrialized Western country that doesn't have a labor-based
political party, and we haven't had one here since the Populist Party in the
1890s. So we have a very depoliticized population, and that could be one
cause of this phenomenon: if social and political life don't offer you opportunities to form communities and associate yourself with things that are
meaningful to you, people look for other ways to do it, and religion's an obvious one. It's strikingly the case in the black communities, actually, where
the black churches have been the real organizing center which holds life together: I mean, there's terrible oppression, a lot of families are falling apart,
but the church is there, it brings people together and they can get together
and do things in that context. And the same is true in many white communities as well.
Now, I don't think you can draw too many sweeping conclusions from
religion itself-it's kind of like technology, it depends what you use it for.
Like, even among the fundamentalists, you've got Sojourners [a politically
progressive religious group], and you have Jerry Falwell [a right-wing
televangelist]. But it certainly does carry with it the potential of aligning
with other

Chapter Two

51

forms of fanaticism-and that's a big danger in the United States, because it's
a very significant movement here. In fact, by now just about every major
political figure in the country has to associate himself with it in some way.
In the 1980 election, for example, all of the three candidates [i.e. Carter,
Reagan, and independent candidate John Anderson] advertised themselves
as Born Again Christians. In the 1984 election, one of the candidates advertised himself as a Born Again Christian, and the other was a Methodist minister or something.35 In the 1988 election, Dukakis was secular, which is
unusual, but Bush said he was religious.
Actually, Bush, technically speaking, is not really President-because he
refused to take the Oath of Office. I don't know how many of you noticed
this, but the wording of the Oath of Office is written in the Constitution, so
you can't fool around with it-and Bush refused to read it. The Oath of Office says something about, "I promise to do this, that, and the other thing,"
and Bush added the words, "so help me God." Well, that's illegal: he's not
President, if anybody cares.36
ALL: All right! Yeah!
Happy? Yeah, let's impeach him.
I mean, it wasn't because Bush is religious-Bush knows where the nearest church is ... because he has to show up there every once in a while. Or
take Reagan: what does it mean to say he was a Born Again Christian? It
means somebody told him he's a Born Again Christian. In Bush's case,
though, I presume he's totally secular, he just knows that by now you've got
to make a nod to this huge fundamentalist constituency-and since you're not
going to offer them anything they really want, you offer them symbolic
things, like saying "so help me God" or something like that.
But the point is, if things ever really come to a crunch in the United
States, this massive part of the population-I think it's something like a third
of the adult population by now-could be the basis for some kind of a fascist
movement, readily. For example, if the country sinks deeply into a
recession, a depoliticized population could very easily be mobilized into
thinking it's somebody else's fault: "Why are our lives collapsing? There
have to be bad guys out there doing something for things to be going so
badly"-and the bad guys can be Jews, or homosexuals, or blacks, or
Communists, whatever you pick. If you can whip people into irrational
frenzies like that, they can be extremely dangerous: that's what 1930s
Fascism came from, and something like that could very easily happen here.
"The Real Anti-Semitism"
MAN: Do you know about the connections between the Republican Party
and the neo-Nazis which were revealed a few months ago-and could you
talk a bit about what might be the significance of that in this context?

52

Understanding Power

That was sort of an interesting phenomenon; it's hard to know exactly
how seriously to take it, but it's certainly very real. I don't know how many
of you followed what happened with the Nazis in the Bush campaign
around last August-do you know about that stuff?
There's this part of the Bush campaign called the "Ethnic Outreach
Committee," which tries to organize ethnic minorities; obviously that
doesn't mean blacks or Hispanics, it means Ukrainians, Poles, that sort of
business. And it turned out that it was being run by a bunch of East European Nazis, Ukrainian Nazis, hysterical anti-Semites, Romanians who came
out of the Iron Guard, and so on. Well, finally this got exposed; some of the
people were reshuffled, some were put into other positions in the Republican Party-but it all just passed over very quietly. The Democrats never
even raised the issue during the election campaign.37
You might ask, why? How come the Democrats never even raised the
issue? Well, I think there was a very good reason for that: I think the Jewish
organizations like the Anti-Defamation League basically called them off.
The point is, these organizations don't ultimately care about anti-Semitism,
what they care about is opposition to the policies of Israel-in fact, opposition to their own hawkish version of the policies of Israel. They're Israeli
government lobbies, essentially, and they understood that these Nazis in the
Bush campaign were quite pro-Israel, so what do they care? The New Republic, which is sort of an organ for these groups, had a very interesting editorial on it. It was about anti-Semitism, and it referred to the fact that this
committee was being run by anti-Semites, Holocaust deniers, Nazis and so
on, and then it said: yes, that's all true, but this is just "antique and anemic"
anti-Semitism. Nazism is just "antique and anemic" anti-Semitism, not
terribly important, we shouldn't get too upset about it. And then it said: the
real anti-Semitism that we ought to be worried about is in the Democratic
Party, which is filled with "Jew-haters"-that was the phrase they used. And
part of the proof is, the Democrats were actually willing to debate a
resolution calling for Palestinian self-determination at their National
Convention, so therefore they're "Jew-haters" and that's the "real" antiSemitism in America. (That was in fact the title of a book by the Director of
the A.D.L., Nathan Perlmutter.)38 Well, the Democrats got the message
that they weren't going to win any points with this, so they never raised a
peep about it.
Incidentally, this is only one of the things that happened at that timethere's another story which got even less publicity, and is even more revealing. The Department of Education has a program of grants that it dispenses
to fund projects initiated by local school systems, and for the last four or
five years the school board in Brookline, Massachusetts, has been trying to
get funding for a project on the Holocaust which always gets very favorably
reviewed, but is always turned down. Again in 1988-also right before the
election-the federal reviewing committee had to deal with their proposal.
As usual it got very favorable reviews, but instead of just turning it down,

Chapter Two

53

this time the government simply eliminated the entire program category
under which it was being submitted. Well, at that point some information
began to surface as to why the project kept getting turned down-and it
turned out that it was being refused every year because of letters the Department was getting from people like Phyllis Schlafly [a right-wing activist] attacking it for being unfair because it didn't give adequate space to
Nazis and Ku Klux Klan members. Besides, they said, it's kind of brainwashing children, and turning them against things like the Holocaust, it's
just more of this neo-liberal tampering with people's thoughts. Parts of
these letters actually got published in the Washington Post and the Boston
Globe.39
Well, you'd have thought there'd be an uproar. A program on the Holocaust gets turned down by the government, by the Reagan administration,
because it doesn't give enough space to Nazis and Klan members? Not a
peep, not a peep. And the point is, Phyllis Schlafly and that whole gang are
adequately pro-Israel-and therefore it doesn't matter what they think. They
can be in favor of the Klan, they can be in favor of the Nazis, they can say
you shouldn't be allowed to teach the Holocaust, it doesn't matter, as long as
they remain sufficiently supportive of hawkish Israeli policies. As long as
they meet that qualification, it's fine, they can say whatever they want.
Ronald Reagan and the Future of Democracy
WOMAN: You mentioned Reagan-I've heard you say his administration
was the first time the United States didn't really have a President. Would
you enlarge on that, and tell us what your thoughts are on the future of that
kind of government?
I think it has a big future, myself-in fact, I think the Reagan administration was sort of a peek into the future. It's a very natural move. Imagine
yourself working in some public relations office where your job is to help
corporations make sure that the annoying public does not get in the way of
policy-making. Here's a brilliant thought that nobody ever had before, so far
as I know: let's make elections completely symbolic activities. The population can keep voting, we'll give them all the business, they'll have electoral campaigns, all the hoopla, two candidates, eight candidates-but the
people they're voting for will then just be expected to read off a
teleprompter and they won't be expected to know anything except what
somebody tells them, and maybe not even that.
I mean, when you read off a teleprompter-I've done it actually-it's a very
odd experience: it's like the words go into your eyes and out your mouth,
and they don't pass through your mind in between. And when Reagan does
it, they have it set up so there are two or three of them around, so

54

Understanding Power

his head can keep moving and it appears as though he's looking around at
the audience, but really he's just switching from one teleprompter to
another. Well, if you can get people to vote for something like that, you've
basically done it-you've removed them from decision-making. It won't
work unless you have an obedient media which will fall over themselves
with what a wonderful, charismatic figure he is-you know, "the most
popular President in history," "he's creating a revolution," "the most
amazing thing since ice cream," and "how can we criticize him, everybody
loves him?" And you have to pretend that nobody's laughing, and so on.
But if you can do that, then you'd have gone a very long way towards marginalizing the public. And I think we probably got there in the 1980s pretty
close to there, anyway.
In all of the books that have come out by people in the Reagan administration, it's been extremely difficult to hide the fact that Reagan didn't have
the foggiest idea what was going on.40 Whenever he wasn't properly programmed, the things that would come out of his mouth were kind of like they weren't lies really, they were kind of like the babbling of a child. If a
child babbles, it's not lies, it's just sort of on some other plane. To be able to
lie, you have to have a certain degree of competence, you have to know
what truth is. And there didn't seem to be any indication that that was the
case here. So in fact, all of the fuss in the Iran-contra hearings about "did
Reagan know or didn't he know" [about the National Security Council's illegal dealings with Iran and the Nicaraguan contras], or "did he remember
or didn't he remember?" I personally regarded as a cover-up. What's the
difference? He didn't know if nobody told him, and he didn't remember if
he forgot. And who cares? He wasn't supposed to know. Reagan's whole
career was reading lines written for him by rich folk. First it was as a
spokesman for General Electric, then it was for somebody else, and he just
continued to the White House: he read the lines written for him by the rich
folk, he did it for eight years, they paid him nicely, he apparently enjoyed it,
he seems to have been quite cheerful there, had a good time. He could sleep
late. And they liked it, the paymasters thought it was fine, they bought a
nice home for him, put him out to pasture.
It's very striking how he disappeared. For eight years, the public relations industry and the media had been claiming that this guy revolutionized
America-you know, the "Reagan Revolution," this fantastic charismatic
figure that everybody loved, he just changed our lives. Okay, then he finished his job, they told him to go home-that's the end. No reporter would
even dream of going out to see Reagan after that to ask him his opinion on
anything-because everybody knows he has no opinion on anything. And
they knew it all along. In the Oliver North trial, for example, stuff came out
about Reagan telling-I don't like to use the word "lie," because, as I say,
you have to have a competence to lie-but Reagan producing false statements to Congress, let's put it that way. The press didn't even care: okay, so
Reagan lied to Congress, let's go on to the next thing. The point is, his job

Chapter Two
55
was done, so therefore he became irrelevant. Sure, they'll trot him out at the
next Republican Convention so everybody can applaud, but that's it.
In a way it was like royalty. I mean, the imperial family in England plays
a real role in depoliticizing the place, and Reagan reminded me a bit of that.
41
For instance, every session of Parliament in England opens with the
Queen reading a message written by the ruling political party, and everybody pretends to take it seriously. But in another part of your brain, you
don't ask, "Did the Queen believe what she was saying?" or, "Did she understand what she was saying?" or "Will she remember what she was saying?" or, "Did she lie to the Parliament?" Those are just not relevant
questions-because the Queen's job is to be royalty, and to be revered, and to
be admired, and to be the model woman that everybody's supposed to be
like. It's kind of like playing a game in the political system, even though
people there do in fact take it seriously in a sense-like they care if the
Princess Diana is having a spat with Something-Or-Other, they think about
it, and they talk about it, and so on. But of course, at some other level of
their intelligence, they know that it has nothing to do with life.
Well, the British have it sort of institutionalized, and you don't vote for
Queen. But suppose you could get to the point where elections in England
were not for Prime Minister and Parliament, but instead people voted for
Queen, and then things ran the way they do now, except the Prime Minister
is just appointed by the banks and the corporations. And in the election
campaign you'd ask, "Who's got the nicest hairdo?" you'd ask, "Who can
say things nicer?" "Who's got the best smile?" Well, then you'd have gone a
long way towards the desired goal of maintaining the formal functioning of
the system, but eliminating the substance from it. And that's pretty much
what we had with Reagan, I think.
Now, I don't know whether Reagan was contrived for that purpose or
whether it just worked out that way, but once having seen it in operation, I
expect that people will learn from it. And in fact, I think you could see
signs of it in the 1988 election as well. I mean, everybody-the media and
everyone else-agreed that there were no real issues in the campaign: the
only issue was whether Dukakis was going to figure out a way of ducking
all the slime that was being thrown at him. That's about the only thing
anybody was voting about, did he duck or didn't he duck? That's like
saying, "Don't bother voting."
MAN: But doesn't it make any difference who wins? I mean, suppose they
gave us Ollie North as President?
Yeah, look, I don't want to say that it makes no difference. The figure
who's there makes some difference-but the less difference it makes, the
more you've marginalized the public.
WOMAN: Do you vote?

56

Understanding Power

Do I? Well, differentially. I mean, I almost always vote for lower-level
candidates, like school committee representatives and things like that
because there it makes a difference, in fact. But as you get more and more
remote from popular control, it makes less and less of a difference. When
you get to the House of Representatives-well, it's sort of academic in my
case, because I live in one of these single-member districts where the same
guy always wins, so it doesn't really matter whether you vote or not. When
you get to Senator, it begins to become pretty symbolic anyway. At the
level of President, half the time I don't even bother-I think those are usually
very subtle judgments. I mean, it's a difficult judgment to try to figure out
whether Nixon or Humphrey is going to end the Vietnam War sooner [in
1968], that's an extremely subtle judgment to make; I actually didn't vote on
that one, because I figured Nixon probably would. I did vote against
Reagan, because I thought the guys around Reagan were extremely dangerous-Reagan himself was irrelevant, but the people in his administration
were real killers and torturers, and they were just making people suffer too
much, so I thought that might make a difference. But these are usually not
very easy judgments to make, in my opinion.
WOMAN: What do you think stopped the impeachment drive against Reagan after the Iran-contra scandal?
It would just embarrass the hell out of everybody-I mean, nobody in
power wants that much disruption for something like that. Look, why don't
they bring every American President to trial for war crimes? There are
things on which there is a complete consensus in the elite culture: the
United States is permitted to carry out war crimes, it's permitted to attack
other countries, it's permitted to ignore international law. On those things
there's a complete consensus, so why should they impeach the President for
doing everything he's supposed to do?
In fact, you can ask all kinds of questions like that. For instance, at the
time of the Nuremberg trials [of Nazi war criminals after World War II],
there was a lot of very pompous rhetoric on the part of the Western prosecutors about how this was not just going to be "victor's justice": it's not just
that we won the war and they lost, we're establishing principles which are
going to apply to us too. Well, by the principles of the Nuremberg trials,
every single American President since then would have been hanged. Has
anyone ever been brought to trial? Has this point even been raised? It's not
a difficult point to demonstrate.42
Actually, the Nuremberg trials are worth thinking about. The Nazis were
something unique, granted. But if you take a look at the Nuremberg trials,
they were very cynical. The operational criterion for what counted as a war
crime at Nuremberg was a criminal act that the West didn't do: in other
words, it was considered a legitimate defense if you could show that the
Americans and the British did the same thing. That's actually true. So

Chapter Two

57

part of the defense of the German submarine commander Admiral Doenitz
was to call an American submarine commander, Admiral Nimitz, to testify
that the Americans did the same thing-that's a defense. Bombing of urban
areas was not considered a war crime at Nuremberg; reason is, the West did
more of it than the Germans. And this is all stated straight out-like if you
read the book by Telford Taylor, the American prosecutor at the trials, this
is the way he describes it; he's very positive about the whole thing.43 If the
West had done it, it wasn't a crime; it was only a crime if the Germans had
done it and we hadn't. I mean, it's true there were plenty of such things, but
still there's something pretty cynical about it.
In fact, even worse than the Nuremberg trials were the Tokyo trials [of
Japanese war criminals]: by the standards of the Tokyo trials, not just every
American President, but everyone would be hanged [at Tokyo, those who
failed to take affirmative steps to prevent war crimes or to dissociate themselves from the government were executed]. General Yamashita was an extreme case: he was hanged because during the American conquest of the
Philippines, troops that were technically under his command, although he
had already lost all contact with them, carried out crimes-therefore he was
hanged. Ask yourself who's going to survive that one. Here's a guy who
was hanged because troops he had no contact with whatsoever, but which
theoretically in some order of battle had to do with his units, committed
atrocities. If those same principles apply to us, who's going to survive? And
that was just one case, I think we killed about a thousand people in the
Tokyo trials-they were really grotesque.44
WOMAN: Just going back to elections for a second-would you say the
'84 elections were the same as '88: no substance?
Well, in the 1984 elections there was still an issue. In the 1984 elections,
the Republicans were the party of Keynesian growth [the economist Keynes
advocated government stimulation of the economy]-they said, "Let's just
keep spending and spending and spending, bigger and bigger deficits, and
somehow that will lead to growth"-whereas the Democrats were the party
of fiscal conservatism: they had this sad-looking son of a minister
[Mondale] saying, "No, no good; we can't keep spending, we're going to get
in trouble, we've got to watch the money supply."
Okay, for anybody who gets amused at these things, the Republicans and
the Democrats had shifted their traditional positions 180 degrees; historically, the Democrats have been the party of Keynesian growth, and the
Republicans have been the party of fiscal conservatism. But they shifted totally-and what's interesting is, nobody even noticed this, I never even saw a
single comment on it in the press. Well, that tells you something: what it
tells you is, there are different sectors of the business community in the
country, and they sometimes have slightly different tactical judgments
about the way to deal with current problems. And when they differ on

58

Understanding Power

something, it'll come up in the election; when they don't differ on anything,
there won't be any issues.
Two New Factors in World Affairs
MAN: To move to a more general level, Professor-I'm interested whether
you think that there are any developments over the past few decades that
are new on the international scene, which people should be aware of as we
analyze things that are taking place in the world?
Well, in my view, there are at least two really major things that are coming along that are new: one is a shift in the international economy.45 And the
other is the threat to the environment-which just can't be ignored much
longer, because if facing it is delayed too much longer there isn't going to
be a lot more to human history.
I'll start with the environment. The reality is that under capitalist conditions-meaning maximization of short-term gain-you're ultimately going to
destroy the environment: the only question is when. Now, for a long time,
it's been possible to pretend that the environment is an infinite source and
an infinite sink. Neither is true obviously, and we're now sort of approaching the point where you can't keep playing the game too much
longer. It may not be very far off. Well, dealing with that problem is going
to require large-scale social changes of an almost unimaginable kind. For
one thing, it's going to certainly require large-scale social planning, and that
means participatory social planning if it's going to be at all meaningful. It's
also going to require a general recognition among human beings that an
economic system driven by greed is going to self-destruct-it's only a question of time before you make the planet unlivable, by destroying the ozone
layer or some other way.46 And that means huge socio-psychological
changes have to take place if the human species is going to survive very
much longer. So that's a big factor.
Quite apart from that, there have been major changes in the international
economy. The world has basically been moving into three major economic
blocks; the United States is no longer the sole economic power like it was
after World War II. There's a Japan-based system, which involves Japan
and the countries around its periphery, like Singapore and Taiwan, the old
Japanese empire. There's Europe, which has been consolidating into the
European Common Market-and that could be a powerful economic unit; if
Europe gets its act together, it'll outweigh the United States: it's got a larger
economy, a bigger population, a more educated population, and they've got
their traditional colonial interests, which are in fact being reconstructed.
Meanwhile the United States has been building up its own counter-block in
North America through so-called "free trade" agreements, which are turning
Canada into kind of an economic colony and ba-

Chapter Two

59

sically absorbing Northern Mexico into the United States as a cheap-labor
area. The three regions are roughly comparable by most measures, with the
Asian region still far ahead in capital reserves.
No one understands quite how this situation will be affected by the financial liberalization that has been so harmful to the global economy since
the mid-1970s. And there are also other intriguing issues. For example, the
European powers, especially Germany, are attempting to reconstruct the
traditional colonial relations between Central Europe and Eastern Europe
that existed before the Cold War-Central Europe has the industry and
technology and investment capital, and Eastern Europe and Russia provide
them with cheap manpower and resources. Meanwhile Japan is doing precisely the same thing with Russia on the Asian side, trying to construct
colonial relations with Siberia: Japan has plenty of extra capital, and Siberia
has plenty of resources that the Russians can't exploit properly because they
don't have the capital or the technology, so it's like a natural combination.
And if these efforts work, then we're going to have the two major enemies
of the United States, Japan and Europe, integrating with the Soviet Union, it
becoming kind of a semi-colonial area related to them. And that realizes the
worst nightmares of American planners.
See, there is an American geopolitical tradition which treats the United
States as an island power off the mainland of Europe; it's a bigger version
of British geopolitics, which treats England as an island power off the
mainland of Europe. I mean, Britain throughout its whole modern history
has tried to prevent Europe from becoming unified-that was the main theme
of British history, prevent Europe from being unified, because we're just
this island power off of Europe, and if they ever get unified we're in
trouble. And the United States has the same attitude towards Eurasia: we've
got to prevent them from becoming unified, because if they are, we become
a real second-class power-we'll still have our little system around here, but
it'll become kind of second-class.47 By "the United States," I mean powerful
interests in the United States, U.S.-based capital.
WOMAN: Then do you think it's possible that the U.S. may not be considered a superpower someday?
Well, you know, despite the relative decline in U.S.-based power, it's
still powerful without historical precedent.
WOMAN: I know it is militarily.
No, even economically. Look, it's a real scandal of the American economic system that the general economic level here is so low. I mean, by
world standards, in terms of, say, infant mortality or lifespan, or most other
measures like that, people are not terribly well-off here-the United States is
well down the list. I think we're twentieth of twenty industrial powers in

60

Understanding Power

infant mortality, for example. We're at about the level of Cuba, which is a
poor Third World country, in terms of health standards. 48 Those are absolute scandals-the general population of the United States ought to be
better off than that of any other country in the world by just a huge margin.
No other industrial power has anything like our resources. We've got an educated population, like basic literacy is relatively high. We have a comparatively uniform population: people speak English all over the place-you
can't find that in too many areas of the world. We've got enormous military
power. We have no enemies anywhere nearby. Very few powers in history
have ever had that situation. So these are just incomparable advantages, and
our economic system has not turned them to the benefit of the population
here, particularly-but they're there, and they're going to stay there.
Now take Japan: Japanese corporations and investors can collect a lot of
capital, but they're never going to get their own resources-they don't have
their own energy resources, they don't have their own raw materials, they
don't have agricultural resources. And we do: that makes a big difference.
In fact, American planners back in the late 1940s were very well aware of
this difference when they sort of organized the post-war world-so while
they helped Japan to reindustrialize, they also insisted on controlling its energy resources: the Japanese were not allowed to develop their own petrochemical industry, or to obtain their own independent access to petroleum
resources. And the reason for that is explained in now-declassified U.S. internal documents: as George Kennan [State Department official and diplomat], who was one of the major planners of the post-war world, pointed out,
if we control Japan's energy resources, we will have veto power over Japanif they ever get out of line, we'll just choke off their energy supply.49 Now,
whether or not that plan would still work you don't know, because the
world is changing in unpredictable ways. But for the moment, the United
States is still overwhelmingly powerful in world affairs-that's why we can
get away with so much.
Democracy Under Capitalism
MAN: You mentioned that we're going to need participatory social planning to save the environment. I'm wondering, doesn't decentralization of
power also somehow conflict with trying to save the environment-! mean,
that can't be done without some sort of central agreement, don't you think?
Well, first of all, agreements don't require centralized authority, certain
kinds of agreements do. One's assumption, at least, is that decentralization
of power will lead to decisions that reflect the interests of the entire population. The idea is that policies flowing from any kind of decision-making apparatus are going to tend to reflect the interests of the people involved in
making the decisions-which certainly seems plausible. So if a decision is

Chapter Two
61
made by some centralized authority, it is going to represent the interests of
the particular group which is in power. But if power is actually rooted in
large parts of the population-if people can actually participate in social
planning-then they will presumably do so in terms of their own interests,
and you can expect the decisions to reflect those interests. Well, the interest
of the general population is to preserve human life; the interest of corporations is to make profits-those are fundamentally different interests.
MAN: In an industrial society, though, one might argue that people need to
have jobs.
Sure, but having jobs doesn't require destroying the environment which
makes life possible. I mean, if you have participatory social planning, and
people are trying to work things out in terms of their own interests, they are
going to want to balance opportunities to work with quality of work, with
type of energy available, with conditions of personal interaction, with the
need to make sure your children survive, and so on and so forth. But those
are all considerations that simply don't arise for corporate executives, they
just are not a part of the agenda. In fact, if the C.E.O. of General Electric
started making decisions on that basis, he'd be thrown out of his job in three
seconds, or maybe there'd be a corporate takeover or something because
those things are not a part of his job. His job is to raise profit and market
share, not to make sure that the environment survives, or that his workers
lead decent lives. And those goals are simply in conflict.
MAN: Give us an example of what exactly you mean by social planning.
Well, right now we have to make big decisions about how to produce energy, for one thing-because if we continue to produce energy by combustion, the human race isn't going to survive very much longer. 50 Alright,
that decision requires social planning: it's not something that you can just
decide on yourself. Like, you can decide to put a solar-energy somethingor-other on your own house, but that doesn't really help. This is the kind of
decision where it only works if it's done on a mass scale.
MAN: I thought you might have been referring to population control.
Yeah, population control is another issue where it doesn't matter if you
do it, everybody has to do it. It's like traffic: I mean, you can't make driving
a car survivable by driving well yourself; there has to be kind of a social
contract involved, otherwise it won't work. Like, if there was no social contract involved in driving-everybody was just driving like a lethal weapon,
going as fast as they can and forgetting all the traffic lights and everything
else-you couldn't make that situation safe just by driving well yourself: it
doesn't make much difference if you set out to drive safely if everybody
else

62

Understanding Power

is driving lethal-weapon, right? The trouble is, that's the way that capitalism
works. The nature of the system is that it's supposed to be driven by greed;
no one's supposed to be concerned for anybody else, nobody's supposed to
worry about the common good-those are not things that are supposed to
motivate you, that's the principle of the system. The theory is that private
vices lead to public benefits-that's what they teach you in economics
departments. It's all total bullshit, of course, but that's what they teach you.
And as long as the system works that way, yeah, it's going to self-destruct.
What's more, capitalists have long understood this. So most government
regulatory systems have in fact been strongly lobbied for by the industries
themselves: industries want to be regulated, because they know that if
they're not, they're going to destroy themselves in the unbridled competition.51
MAN: Then what kind of mechanism for social planning do you think would
work? Obviously you're not too sanguine about our current form of
government.
Well, there's nothing wrong with the form-I mean, there are some things
wrong with the form-but what's really wrong is that the substance is
missing. Look, as long as you have private control over the economy, it
doesn't make any difference what forms you have, because they can't do
anything. You could have political parties where everybody gets together
and participates, and you make the programs, make things as participatory
as you like-and it would still have only the most marginal effect on policy.
And the reason is, power lies elsewhere.
So suppose all of us here convinced everybody in the country to vote for
us for President, we got 98 percent of the vote and both Houses of Congress, and then we started to institute very badly needed social reforms that
most of the population wants. Simply ask yourself, what would happen?
Well, if your imagination doesn't tell you, take a look at real cases. There
are places in the world that have a broader range of political parties than we
do, like Latin American countries, for example, which in this respect are
much more democratic than we are. Well, when popular reform candidates
in Latin America get elected and begin to introduce reforms, two things
typically happen. One is, there's a military coup supported by the United
States. But suppose that doesn't happen. What you get is capital strike investment capital flows out of the country, there's a lowering of investment, and the economy grinds to a halt.
That's the problem that Nicaragua has faced in the 1980s-and which it
cannot overcome, in my view, it's just a hopeless problem. See, the Sandinistas have tried to run a mixed economy: they've tried to carry out social
programs to benefit the population, but they've also had to appeal to the
business community to prevent capital flight from destroying the place. So

Chapter Two

63

most public funds, to the extent there are any, go as a bribe to the wealthy,
to try to keep them investing in the country. The only problem is, the
wealthy would prefer not to invest unless they have political power: they'd
rather see the society destroyed. So the wealthy take the bribes, and they
send them to Swiss banks and to Miami banks-because from their perspective, the Sandinista government just has the wrong priorities. I mean,
these guys hate democracy just as much as Congress hates democracy: they
want the political system to be in the hands of wealthy elites, and when it is
again, then they'll call it "democracy" and they'll resume investing, and the
economy will finally start to function again.
Well, the same thing would happen here if we ever had a popular reform
candidate who actually achieved some formal level of power: there would
be disinvestment, capital strike, a grinding down of the economy. And the
reason is quite simple. In our society, real power does not happen to lie in
the political system, it lies in the private economy: that's where the decisions are made about what's produced, how much is produced, what's
consumed, where investment takes place, who has jobs, who controls the
resources, and so on and so forth. And as long as that remains the case,
changes inside the political system can make some difference-I don't want
to say it's zero-but the differences are going to be very slight.
In fact, if you think through the logic of this, you'll see that so long as
power remains privately concentrated, everybody, everybody, has to be
committed to one overriding goal: and that's to make sure that the rich folk
are happy-because unless they are, nobody else is going to get anything. So
if you're a homeless person sleeping in the streets of Manhattan, let's say,
your first concern must be that the guys in the mansions are happy because
if they're happy, then they'll invest, and the economy will work, and things
will function, and then maybe something will trickle down to you
somewhere along the line. But if they're not happy, everything's going to
grind to a halt, and you're not even going to get anything trickling down. So
if you're a homeless person in the streets, your first concern is the happiness
of the wealthy guys in the mansions and the fancy restaurants. Basically
that's a metaphor for the whole society.
Like, suppose Massachusetts were to increase business taxes. Most of
the population is in favor of it, but you can predict what would happen.
Business would run a public relations campaign-which is true, in fact, it's
not lies-saying, "You raise taxes on business, you soak the rich, and you'll
find that capital is going to flow elsewhere, and you're not going to have
any jobs, you're not going to have anything." That's not the way they'd put
it exactly, but that's what it would amount to: "Unless you make us happy
you're not going to have anything, because we own the place; you live here,
but we own the place." And in fact, that's basically the message that is presented, not in those words of course, whenever a reform measure does
come along somewhere-they have a big propaganda campaign saying, it's
going to hurt jobs, it's going to hurt investment, there's going to be a loss of

64

Understanding Power

business confidence, and so on. That's just a complicated way of saying,
unless you keep business happy, the population isn't going to have
anything.
MAN: What do you think about nationalization of industry as a means of
allowing for this kind of large-scale social planning?
Well, it would depend on how it's done. If nationalization of industry
puts production into the hands of a state bureaucracy or some sort of
Leninist-style vanguard party, then you'd just have another system of exploitation, in my view. On the other hand, if nationalization of industry was
based on actual popular control over industry-workers' control over
factories, community control, with the groups maybe federated together and
so on-then that would be a different story. That would be a very different
story, in fact. That would be extending the democratic system to economic
power, and unless that happens, political power is always going to remain a
very limited phenomenon.
The Empire
WOMAN: Then is the basic goal of the United States when it intervenes in
Third World countries to destroy left-wing governments in order to keep
them from power?
No, the primary concern is to prevent independence, regardless of the
ideology. Remember, we're the global power, so we have to make sure that
all the various parts of the world continue serving their assigned functions
in our global system. And the assigned functions of Third World countries
are to be markets for American business, sources of resources for American
business, to provide cheap labor for American business, and so on. I mean,
there's no big secret about that-the media won't tell you and scholarship
won't tell you, but all you have to do is look at declassified government
documents and this is all explained very frankly and explicitly.
The internal documentary record in the United States goes way back, and
it says the same thing over and over again. Here's virtually a quote: the
main commitment of the United States, internationally in the Third World,
must be to prevent the rise of nationalist regimes which are responsive to
pressures from the masses of the population for improvement in low living
standards and diversification of production; the reason is, we have to maintain a climate that is conducive to investment, and to ensure conditions
which allow for adequate repatriation of profits to the West. Language like
that is repeated year after year in top-level U.S. planning documents, like
National Security Council reports on Latin America and so on-and that's
exactly what we do around the world. 52
So the nationalism we oppose doesn't need to be left-wing-we're just as

Chapter Two

65

much opposed to right-wing nationalism. I mean, when there's a right-wing
military coup which seeks to turn some Third World country on a course of
independent development, the United States will also try to destroy that
government-we opposed Peron in Argentina, for example. 53 So despite
what you always hear, U.S. interventionism has nothing to do with resisting
the spread of "Communism," it's independence we've always been opposed
to everywhere-and for quite a good reason. If a country begins to pay attention to its own population, it's not going to be paying adequate attention
to the overriding needs of U.S. investors. Well, those are unacceptable priorities, so that government's just going to have to go.
And the effects of this commitment throughout the Third World are
dramatically clear: it takes only a moment's thought to realize that the areas
that have been the most under U.S. control are some of the most horrible
regions in the world. For instance, why is Central America such a horror chamber? I mean, if a peasant in Guatemala woke up in Poland [i.e. under
Soviet occupation], he'd think he was in heaven by comparison-and Guatemala's an area where we've had a hundred years of influence. Well, that
tells you something. Or look at Brazil: potentially an extremely rich country
with tremendous resources, except it had the curse of being part of the
Western system of subordination. So in northeast Brazil, for example,
which is a rather fertile area with plenty of rich land, just it's all owned by
plantations, Brazilian medical researchers now identify the population as a
new species with about 40 percent the brain size of human beings, a result
of generations of profound malnutrition and neglect-and this may be unremediable except after generations, because of the lingering effects of malnutrition on one's offspring. 54 Alright, that's a good example of the legacy
of our commitments, and the same kind of pattern runs throughout the former Western colonies.
In fact, if you look at the countries that have developed in the world,
there's a little simple fact which should be obvious to anyone on five minutes' observation, but which you never find anyone saying in the United
States: the countries that have developed economically are those which
were not colonized by the West; every country that was colonized by the
West is a total wreck. I mean, Japan was the one country that managed to
resist European colonization, and it's the one part of the traditional Third
World that developed. Okay, Europe conquered everything except Japan,
and Japan developed. What does that tell you? Historians of Africa have
actually pointed out that if you look at Japan when it began its industrialization process [in the 1870s], it was at about the same developmental level
as the Asante kingdom in West Africa in terms of resources available, level
of state formation, degree of technological development, and so on.55 Well,
just compare those two areas today. It's true there were a number of differences between them historically, but the crucial one is that Japan wasn't
conquered by the West and the Asante kingdom was, by the British-so now
West Africa is West Africa economically, and Japan is Japan.

66

Understanding Power

Japan had its own colonial system too, incidentally-but its colonies developed, and they developed because Japan didn't treat them the way the
Western powers treated their colonies. The Japanese were very brutal colonizers, they weren't nice guys, but they nonetheless developed their colonies
economically; the West just robbed theirs. So if you look at the growth rate
of Taiwan and Korea during the period of Japanese colonization, it was approximately the same as Japan's own growth rate through the early part of
this century-they were getting industrialized, developing infrastructure,
educational levels were going up, agricultural production was increasing. In
fact, by the 1930s, Formosa (now Taiwan) was one of the commercial
centers of Asia.56 Well, just compare Taiwan with the Philippines, an American colony right next door: the Philippines is a total basket-case, a Latin
American-style basket-case. Again, that tells you something.
With World War II, the Japanese colonial system got smashed up. But
by the 1960s, Korea and Taiwan were again developing at their former
growth rate-and that's because in the post-war period, they've been able to
follow the Japanese model of development: they're pretty closed off to
foreign exploitation, quite egalitarian by international standards, they
devote pretty extensive resources to things like education and health care.
Okay, that's a successful model for development. I mean, these Asian
countries aren't pretty; I can't stand them myself-they're extremely
authoritarian, the role of women you can't even talk about, and so on, so
there are plenty of unpleasant things about them. But they have been able to
pursue economic development measures that are successful: the state
coordinates industrial policy, capital export is strictly constrained, import
levels are kept low. Well, those are exactly the kinds of policies that are
impossible in Latin America, because the U.S. insists that those
governments keep their economies open to international markets-so capital
from Latin America is constantly flowing to the West. Alright, that's not a
problem in South Korea: they have the death penalty for capital export.
Solves that difficulty pretty fast. 57
But the point is, the Japanese-style development model works-in fact, it's
how every country in the world that's developed has done it: by imposing
high levels of protectionism, and by extricating its economy from free
market discipline. And that's precisely what the Western powers have been
preventing the rest of the Third World from doing, right up to this moment.
WOMAN: Is there any hope for disbanding America's empire, do you
think?
Well, it seems to me the situation is kind of like what one concludes
from looking at the very likely potential of ecological catastrophe: either
control over these matters is left in the hands of existing power interests and
the rest of the population just abdicates, goes to the beach and hopes that
somehow their children will survive-or else people will become sufficiently
orga-

Chapter Two
67
nized to break down the entire system of exploitation, and finally start putting it under participatory control. One possibility will mean complete disaster; the other, you can imagine all kinds of things. For example, even
profitability would no longer be all that important-what would be important
is living in a decent way.
Look, the general population here does not gain very much from holding
on to our imperial system-in fact, it may gain nothing from it. If you take a
look at imperial systems over history, it's not at all clear that they are profitable enterprises in the final analysis. This has been studied in the case of
the British Empire, and while you only get kind of qualitative answers, it
looks as if the British Empire may have cost as much to maintain as the
profits that came from it. And probably something like that is true for the
U.S.-dominated system too. So take Central America: there are profits from
our controlling Central America, but it's very doubtful that they come anywhere near the probably ten billion dollars a year in tax money that's required to maintain U.S. domination there.58
WOMAN: Those costs are paid by the people, though, while the profits are
made by the rich.
That's it exactly-if you ask, "Why have an empire?" you've just given the
answer. The empire is like every other part of social policy: it's a way for
the poor to payoff the rich in their own society. So if the empire is just another form of social policy by which the poor are subsidizing the rich, that
means that under democratic social planning, there would be very little incentive for it-let alone the obvious moral considerations that would become
a factor at that point. In fact, all kinds of questions would just change,
radically.
Change and the Future
MAN: Mr. Chomsky, you present a very powerful view of the problems of
capitalism, which I totally accept. When you start talking about the dissidence of the American population and the possibilities for large-scale
change, though, I've got to admit that I have a little bit of trouble. I don't
see the same general disillusionment with the system that you describe. I
think people maybe see things that are wrong in certain areas, maybe see
that they're powerless, but on the whole still really seem to buy into it--they
think Reagan was a hands-off guy, not a figurehead created by the public
relations industry.
Well, people aren't out in the streets revolting, that's true-you can just
look outside the door and see that. But by any index I know, the fact of the
matter is that the public has become dramatically more dissident and skep-

68

Understanding Power

tical. So for example, about half the population thinks that the government
is just run by "a few big interests looking out for themselves." 59 As to
whether Reagan was a hands-off guy or a figurehead, frankly that doesn't
matter very much. The reality is that people either know or can quickly be
convinced that they are not involved in policy-making, that policy is being
made by powerful interests which don't have much to do with them. Now, I
think they sometimes misidentify the powerful interests-for instance, they
include labor unions as among them; well, that's propaganda. But when
they mention corporations, big media, banks, investment firms, law firms
that cater to their interests, things like that, okay, then I think they're on
target.
So, yeah, people aren't out revolting in the streets, that's for sure. But I
think there's plenty of potential. I mean, the environmental movement is
big, and remember, it's a movement of the Seventies, not the Sixties. The
Third World solidarity movements are movements of the Eighties. The
antinuclear movement is a movement of the Eighties. The feminist
movement is Seventies and Eighties. And it's way beyond movements-there
are all kinds of people who are just cynical: they don't have any faith in
institutions, they don't trust anybody, they hate the government, they
assume they're being manipulated and controlled and that something's
going on which they don't know about. Now, that's not necessarily a move
to the left: that could be the basis for fascism too-it's just a question of what
people do with it. I mean, this kind of depoliticized, cynical population
could easily be mobilized by Jimmy Swaggart [a televangelist], or it could
be organized by environmentalists. Mostly it just depends on who's willing
to do the work.
WOMAN: But do you actually believe that these positive changes will
come?
I don't know, I really haven't the slightest idea. But nobody could ever
have predicted any revolutionary struggle-they're just not predictable. I
mean, you couldn't have predicted in 1775 that there was going to be an
American Revolution, it would have been impossible to have predicted it.
But there was. You couldn't have predicted in 1954 that there was going to
be a Civil Rights Movement. You couldn't have predicted in 1987 that
there was going to be an uprising on the West Bank. I don't think at any
stage in history it has ever been possible to decide whether to be optimistic
or pessimistic, you just don't know-nobody understands how change
happens, so how can you guess?
Let me just take a concrete case. In 1968, M.I.T. [the Massachusetts Institute of Technology] was the deadest place in the world-there was no antiwar activity, nothing was going on. And this was after the Tet Offensive:
Wall Street had turned against the war, M.IT. still hadn't heard about it.
Well, a small group of students who were in a little collective on campus

Chapter Two

69

decided they would set up a sanctuary for a soldier who deserted; that was
the kind of thing activists were doing back then. There was this working class Marine kid who wanted to desert as an anti-war gesture, so the idea
was, people would stay with him until the cops came, then they'd try to
make a public issue out of it. There was a discussion about this among ten or
fifteen students and two or three faculty members-and I came out against it,
because I was totally pessimistic; I thought it couldn't possibly work, I
thought that it would be a complete fiasco. But they went ahead with it.
Well, it turned out to be an incredible success. I mean, within about two
days, the whole of M.IT. was totally shut down-there weren't any classes,
nothing was going on, the whole student body was over in the Student Center. It turned into a 24-hour mixture of seminars, and you know, this horrible
music that people listen to, all that kind of stuff-it was very exciting. And it
just changed the whole character of the place; ever since then, M.IT. has not
been the same. I mean, it's not that it turned into Utopia or anything, but a
lot of concern developed and a lot of activity started up, which still
continues, on issues which people didn't even consider before. Well, could
you have guessed? I mean, I guessed wrong, they guessed right. But as far
as I can see, it was basically like flipping a coin.

3

Teach-In: Evening
Based primarily on discussions at Rowe,
Massachusetts, April 15-16, 1989.

The Military-Industrial Complex
WOMAN: What's been the point of the arms race, Dr. Chomsky?
Well, there are a lot of things, it's served a number of crucial functions.
Remember, any state, any state, has a primary enemy: its own population. If
politics begins to break out inside your own country and the population
starts getting active, all kinds of horrible things can happen-so you have to
keep the population quiescent and obedient and passive. And international
conflict is one of the best ways of doing it: if there's a big enemy around,
people will abandon their rights, because you've got to survive. So the arms
race is functional in that respect-it creates global tension and a mood of fear.
It's also functional for controlling the empire: if we want to invade South
Vietnam, let's say, we have to be able to make it look as if we're defending
ourselves from the Russians. If we're not able to do that, it's going to be a lot
harder to invade South Vietnam. The domestic population just won't accept
it-it's costly, it's morally costly if nothing else, to do these things.
The arms race also plays a crucial role in keeping the economy goingand
that's a big problem. Suppose that the arms race really did decline: how
would you force the taxpayers to keep subsidizing high-technology industry
like they've been doing for the past fifty years? Is some politician going to
get up and say, "Alright, next year you're going to lower your standard of
living, because you have to subsidize I.B.M. so that it can produce fifthgeneration computers"? Nobody's going to be able to sell that line. If any
politician ever started talking that way, people would say: "Okay, we want
to start getting involved in social and economic policy-making too."
In fact, that danger has been very openly discussed in the business litera70

Chapter Three
71
ture in the United States for forty or fifty years.1 Business leaders know perfectly well what every economist knows: that spending for civilian
purposes is maybe even more efficient, more profitable than spending for
military purposes. And they also know that there are any number of ways to
have the population subsidize high-technology industry besides through the
Pentagon system-business knows that perfectly well, and it also knows the
reasons against it. They remain what they always were.
If you take an economics course, they'll teach you, correctly, that if the
government spends n dollars to stimulate the economy, it doesn't really
matter what it's spent on: they can build jet planes, they can bury it in the
sand and get people to dig for it, they can build roads and houses, they can
do all sorts of things-in terms of stimulating the economy, the economic
effects are not all that different.2 In fact, it's perfectly likely that military
spending is actually a less efficient stimulus than social spending, for all
kinds of reasons. But the problem is, spending for civilian purposes has
negative side effects. For one thing, it interferes with managerial prerogatives. The money that's funneled through the Pentagon system is just a
straight gift to the corporate manager, it's like saying, "I'll buy anything you
produce, and I'll pay for the research and development, and if you can make
any profits, fine." From the point of view of the corporate manager, that's
optimal. But if the government started producing anything that business
might be able to sell directly to the commercial market, then it would be
interfering with corporate profit-making. Production of waste-of expensive,
useless machinery-is not an interference: nobody else is going to produce
B-2 bombers, right? So that's one point.
The other point, which is probably even more serious from the perspective of private power, is that social spending increases the danger of democracy-it threatens to increase popular involvement in decision-making. For
example, if the government gets involved, say around here, in building hospitals and schools and roads and things like that, people are going to get interested in it, and they'll want to have a say in it-because it affects them, and
is related to their lives. On the other hand, if the government says, "We're
going to build a Stealth Bomber," nobody has any opinions. People care
about where there's going to be a school or a hospital, but they don't care
about what kind of jet plane you build-because they don't have the foggiest
idea about that. And since one of the main purposes of social policy is to
keep the population passive, people with power are going to want to
eliminate anything that tends to encourage the population to get involved in
planning-because popular involvement threatens the monopoly of power by
business, and it also stimulates popular organizations, and mobilizes
people, and probably would lead to redistribution of profits, and so on.
MAN: How about just reducing taxes, instead of sending all this money into
the military-industrial complex?

72

Understanding Power

You can't reduce taxes much-because what else is going to keep the
economy going? Remember, it's been known since the Great Depression
that anything like free-market capitalism is a total disaster: it can't work.
Therefore every country in the world that has a successful economy is
somewhere close to fascism-that is, with massive government intervention
in the economy to coordinate it and protect it from hostile forces such as too
much competition. I mean, there just is no other way to do it really: if you
pulled that rug out from under private enterprise, we'd go right back into the
Depression again. That's why every industrial economy has a massive state
sector-and the way our massive state sector works in the United States is
mainly through the military system.
I mean, I.B.M. isn't going to pay the costs of research and developmentwhy should they? They want the taxpayer to pay them, say by funding a
N.A.S.A. program, or the next model of fighter jet. And if they can't sell
everything they produce in the commercial market, they want the taxpayer
to buy it, in the form of a missile launching system or something. If there
are some profits to be made, fine, they'll be happy to make the profits-but
they always want the public subsidies to keep flowing. And that's exactly
how it's worked in general in the United States for the past fifty years.
So for example, in the 1950s computers were not marketable, they just
weren't good enough to sell in the market-so taxpayers paid 100 percent of
the costs of developing them, through the military system (along with 85
percent of research and development for electronics generally, in fact). By
the 1960s, computers began to be marketable-and they were handed over to
the private corporations so they could make the profits from them; still,
about 50 percent of the costs of computer development were paid by the
American taxpayer in the 1960s.3 In the 1980s, there was a big new "fifth generation" computer project-they were developing new fancy software,
new types of computers, and so on-and the development of all of that was
extremely expensive. So therefore it went straight back to the taxpayer to
foot the bills again-that's what S.D.I. [the Strategic Defense Initiative] was
about, "Star Wars." Star Wars is basically a technique for subsidizing high technology industry. Nobody believes that it's a defense system-I mean,
maybe Reagan believes it, but nobody whose head is screwed on believes
that Star Wars is a military system. It's simply a way to subsidize the development of the next generation of high technology-fancy software, complicated computer systems, fifth-generation computers, lasers, and so on.4
And if anything marketable comes out of all that, okay, then the taxpayer
will be put aside as usual, and it'll go to the corporations to make the profits
off it.
In fact, just take a look at the parts of the American economy that are
competitive internationally: it's agriculture, which gets massive state subsidies; the cutting edge of high-tech industry, which is paid for by the Pentagon; and the pharmaceutical industry, which is heavily subsidized through

Chapter Three
73
public science funding-those are the parts of the economy that function
competitively. And the same thing is true of every other country in the
world: the successful economies are the ones that have a big government
sector. I mean, capitalism is fine for the Third World-we love them to be
inefficient. But we're not going to accept it. And what's more, this has been
true since the beginnings of the industrial revolution: there is not a single
economy in history that developed without extensive state intervention, like
high protectionist tariffs and subsidies and so on. In fact, all the things we
prevent the Third World from doing have been the prerequisites for development everywhere else-I think that's without exception. So to return to
your question, there just is no way to cut taxes very much without the entire
economy collapsing.
The Permanent War Economy
MAN: I'm a little surprised to hear you say that the Pentagon is so important to our economy.
There's hardly an element of advanced-technology industry in the United
States that's not tied into the Pentagon system-which includes N.A.S.A., the
Department of Energy [which produces nuclear weapons], that whole
apparatus. In fact, that's basically what the Pentagon's for, and that's also
why its budget always stays pretty much the same. I mean, the Pentagon
budget is higher in real terms than it was under Nixon-and to the extent that
it's declined in recent years, it's in fact had the effect of what they call
"harming the economy." For instance, the Pentagon budget started to decline in 1986, and in 1987 real wages started to fall off for skilled workers,
in other words for the college-educated. Before that they'd been declining
for unskilled workers, and they started to go down for the college-educated
a year after the Pentagon budget began to drop off a bit. And the reason is,
college-educated people are engineers, and skilled workers, and managers
and so on, and they're very dependent on the whole Pentagon system for
jobs-so even a slight decline in military spending immediately showed up in
real wage levels for that sector of the population.5
Actually, if you look back at the debates which went on in the late 1940s
when the Pentagon system was first being set up, they're very revealing.
You have to examine the whole development against the background of
what had just happened. There was this huge Depression in the 1930s,
worldwide, and at that point everyone understood that capitalism was dead.
I mean, whatever lingering beliefs people had had about it, and they weren't
very much before, they were gone at that point-because the whole capitalist
system had just gone into a tailspin: there was no way to save it the way it
was going. Well, everyone of the rich countries hit upon more or less the
same method of getting out. They did it independently, but they more or

74

Understanding Power

less hit on the same method-namely, state spending, public spending of
some kind, what's called "Keynesian stimulation." And that did finally get
countries out of the Depression. In the Fascist countries, it worked very
well-they got out pretty fast. And in fact, every country became sort of
fascist; again, "fascism" doesn't mean gas chambers, it means a special form
of economic arrangement with state coordination of unions and corporations
and a big role for big business. And this point about everyone being fascist
was made by mainstream Veblenite-type economists [i.e. after the
American economist Veblen] right at the time, actually-they said,
everybody's fascist, the only question is what form the fascism takes: it
takes different forms depending on the country's cultural patterns.6
Well, in the United States, the form that fascism took at first was the
New Deal [legislative programs enacted in the 1930s to combat the Depression]. But the New Deal was too small, it didn't really have much
effect-in 1939, the Depression was still approximately what it had been in
1932. Then came the Second World War, and at that point we became really
fascist: we had a totalitarian society basically, with a command economy,
wage and price controls, allocations of materials, all done straight from
Washington. And the people who were running it were mostly corporate
executives, who were called to the capital to direct the economy during the
war effort. And they got the point: this worked. So the U.S. economy prospered during the war, industrial production almost quadrupled, and we were
finally out of the Depression.7
Alright, then the war ended: now what happens? Well, everybody expected that we were going to go right back into the Depression-because
nothing fundamental had changed, the only thing that had changed was that
we'd had this big period of government stimulation of the economy during
the war. So the question was, what happens now? Well, there was pent-up
consumer demand-a lot of people had made money and wanted to buy
refrigerators and stuff. But by about 1947 and '48, that was beginning to tail
off, and it looked like we were going to go back into another recession. And
if you go back and read the economists, people like Paul Samuelson and
others in the business press, at that point they were saying that advanced
industry, high-technology industry, "cannot survive in a competitive,
unsubsidized free-enterprise economy"-that's just hopeless.s They figured
we were heading right back to the Depression, but now they knew the
answer: government stimulation. And by then they even had a theory for it,
Keynes; before that they'd just done it by instinct.
So at that point, there was general agreement among business and elite
planners in the United States that there would have to be massive government funneling of public funds into the economy, the only question was
how to do it. Then came kind of an interesting ... it wasn't really a debate,
because it was settled before it was started, but the issue was at least raised:
should the government pursue military spending or social spending? Well, it
was quickly made very clear in those discussions that the route that government spending was going to have to take was military. And that was not

Chapter Three
75
for reasons of economic efficiency, nothing of the sort-it was just for
straight power reasons, like the ones I mentioned: military spending doesn't
redistribute wealth, it's not democratizing, it doesn't create popular constituencies or encourage people to get involved in decision-making.9 It's
just a straight gift to the corporate manager, period. It's a cushion for
managerial decisions that says, "No matter what you do, you've got a
cushion down there" -and it doesn't have to be a big portion of total
revenues, like maybe it's a few percent, but it's a very important cushion.10
And the public is not supposed to know about it. So as the first Secretary
of the Air Force, Stuart Symington, put the matter very plainly back in
1948, he said: "The word to use is not 'subsidy,' the word to use is 'security.'
"11 In other words, if you want to make sure that the government can
finance the electronics industry, and the aircraft industry, and computers,
and metallurgy, machine tools, chemicals, and so on and so forth, and you
don't want the general public trying to have a say in any of it, you have to
maintain a pretense of constant security threats-and they can be Russia,
they can be Libya, they can be Grenada, Cuba, whatever's around.
Well, that's what the Pentagon system is about: it's a system for ensuring
a particular form of domination and control. And that system has worked
for the purposes for which it was designed-not to give people better lives,
but to "make the economy healthy," in the standard sense of the phrase:
namely, ensuring corporate profits. And that it does, very effectively. So
you see, the United States has a major stake in the arms race: it's needed for
domestic control, for controlling the empire, for keeping the economy running. And it's going to be very hard to get around that; I actually think that's
one of the toughest things for a popular movement to change, because
changing the commitment to the Pentagon system will affect the whole
economy and the way it's run. It's a lot harder than, say, getting out of
Vietnam. That was a peripheral issue for the system of power. This is a
central issue.
In fact, I've been arguing for years with friends of mine who are campaigning for "conversion" of the economy from military production to social spending that they're basically talking nonsense. I mean, it's not that
business has to be told "for this many jet planes we could have this many
schools, isn't it awful to build jet planes?" You don't have to convince the
head of General Motors of that: he knew that forty years before anyone
started talking about "conversion," that's why he wanted jet planes. There is
no point in explaining to people in power that "conversion" would be better
for the world. Sure it would. What do they care? They knew that long ago,
that's why they went in the opposite direction. Look: this system was
designed, with a lot of conscious and intelligent thought, for the particular
purpose that it serves. So any kind of "conversion" will just have to be part
of a total restructuring of the society, designed to undermine centralized
control.
And I mean, you're going to need an alternative-it's not enough just to
cut off the Pentagon budget, that's just going to make the economy col-

76

Understanding Power

lapse, because the economy is dependent on it. Something else has to happen unless you just want to go back to the Stone Age. So the first thing simply has to be creating both a culture and an institutional structure in which
public funds can be used for social needs, for human needs. That's the mistake that a lot of the "conversion" people make, in my opinion: they're just
identifying what's obvious, they're not focusing enough on creating the
basis for an alternative.
WOMAN: What is the hope, then, for dismantling the whole military
system?
There have to be large-scale institutional changes, we need a real democratization of the society. I mean, if we continue to have domination of the
economic and political system by corporations, why should they behave
any differently? It's not that the people in the corporations are bad people,
it's that the institutional necessity of the system is to maintain corporate
domination and profit-making. I mean, if the Chairman of General Motors
suddenly decided to start producing the best quality cars at the cheapest
prices, he wouldn't be Chairman any longer-there'd be a shift on the stock
market and they'd throw him out in five minutes. And that generalizes to
the system as a whole. There is absolutely no reason why the people who
own the economy would want it to be set up in a way that undermines or
weakens their control, any more than there's a reason why they would want
there to be a political system in which the population genuinely participates-why would they? They'd be crazy. Just like they'd be crazy if they
opened up the media to dissident opinion-what possible purpose would
there be in that? Or if they let the universities teach honest history, let's say.
It would be absurd.
Now, that doesn't mean that there's nothing we can do. Even within the
current structure of power, there's plenty of latitude for pressure and
changes and reforms. I mean, any institution is going to have to respond to
public pressure-because their interest is to keep the population more or less
passive and quiescent, and if the population is not passive and quiescent,
then they have to respond to that. But really dealing with the problems at
their core ultimately will require getting to the source of power and
dissolving it-otherwise you may be able to fix things up around the edges,
but you won't really change anything fundamentally. So the alternative just
has to be putting control over these decisions into popular hands-there
simply is no other way besides dissolving and diffusing power democratically, I think.

Chapter Three

77

Libyan and American Terrorism
WOMAN: Switching to current events a bit, Mr. Chomsky-"terrorism" is a
phenomenon that really took off in the media in the 1980s. Why do you
think all of a sudden Libya became such a great threat to us?
Well, because from the very first minute that the Reagan administration
came into office, it immediately selected Libya as a punching bag.12 And
there were very good reasons for that: Libya's defenseless, Qaddafi is sort
of hateful and kind of a thug-a very small-time thug, I might say, but nevertheless a thug-and he's also an Arab, and there's a lot of anti-Arab racism
around.13 And the Reagan administration needed to create fear: it had to
mobilize the population to do things they didn't want to do, like support a
massive increase in military spending.
I mean, Reagan could talk about the "Evil Empire," but he couldn't get
into any confrontations with the Evil Empire-because that's dangerous; the
Soviets can fight back, and they've got missiles and things like that. So the
trick was to find somebody who's frightening enough to scare Americans
into accepting a huge military build-up, but nevertheless weak enough so
you could beat him up without anyone fighting back. And the answer was
Qaddafi, and international terrorism generally.
International terrorism by Arabs is certainly real. I mean, overwhelmingly international terrorism comes out of Washington and Miami, but there
is a relatively small amount of it that comes from the Arab world. 14 And
people don't like it-they blow up planes, and it's scary, and it's Arabs, it's
weird-looking guys who have dark faces and mustaches. How does it
become a big enough threat that we have to build more missiles and so on?
Well, it's Kremlin-directed international terrorism. IS This stuff was crafted
from the first moment-and furthermore, it was all utterly transparent right
from the very beginning, like I was writing about it as early as 1981.16 The
media pretend they don't understand it, scholarship pretends it doesn't
understand it, but it's been as predictable as a broken record: they put it on
in 1981, and it's still playing.
The whole media campaign on terrorism started with a series of C.I.A.
disinformation releases about Libya. In 1981 the C.I.A. leaked a story to the
press about U.S. efforts to assassinate Qaddafi, in the hope that this would
lead Qaddafi to some kind of erratic reaction which we could then use as an
excuse to bomb him. Okay, that was exposed: the first reference to C.I.A.
disinformation about Libya appeared in Newsweek in August 1981, when
Newsweek stated that it had been subjected to a disinformation campaign by
the government. 17 Since then, there have been about a half-dozen similar
cases in which Washington floated some lunatic story about Libya and the
media bought it, then discovered later that it was disinformation and
pretended they were all surprised; I mean, at some point you'd think they
would begin to ask what's going on, but apparently not. And some of

78

Understanding Power

these cases were completely crazy-there was a story about Libyan hitmen
wandering around Washington, S.W.A.T. teams on alert patrolling the
White House, that kind of thing. It was all total madness.18
Well, everyone of these confrontations with Libya has been timed for
some domestic purpose. The big one, the bombing of Libya in April 1986,
was timed for the contra aid vote in Congress-the point was to build up a lot
of hysteria beforehand, and it kind of worked: they rammed through a big
aid package a month or two later.19 It was all a complete set-up, totally
prefabricated. First, a confrontation was arranged in which Libyan artillery
guns fired at a U.S. fighter plane. You'll notice that somehow it's always the
U.S. Navy or the U.S. Air Force that Libya is shooting at-they never shoot at
Italian planes, or French planes, or Spanish planes, it's always American
planes. Well, what's the reason? One possibility is the Libyans are insane:
they go after the people who are going to wipe them out. The other possibility is that the Americans are trying to get shot at, which is of course the
truth. The reason the Libyans only shoot at American planes is because
American planes are sent over there to get shot at; nobody else sends planes
into the Gulf of Sidra, because there's no point in doing it, so therefore they
don't get shot at.
See, Libya says the Gulf of Sidra is a part of its territorial waters, and the
United States refuses to accept that. Well, there's a way that countries can
resolve such disputes: you take them to the World Court and get a ruling; a
law-abiding state does it that way. Alright, that option was raised in the
United States, but the State Department said, no, we can't do it, it's much
too desperate a situation; getting a decision from the World Court will take
two years. You know, we can't put off for two years whether the U.S. Navy
can go into the Gulf of Sidra, the United States will collapse. All this stuff
is so ludicrous you can barely repeat it.2o
The beginning phase of the 1986 confrontation occurred when American
planes penetrated Libyan territorial air space and finally got shot athappily,
because they know they're never actually going to be hit by the Libyan air
defenses. They then flew back to the fleet, and the American Navy bombed
a bunch of Libyan navy vessels and killed lots of Libyans. That was great, a
real victory.
Following that, on April 5th, 1986, a discotheque in West Berlin was
bombed; two people were killed. Rather crucially, one of them was a Turkish woman and the other was a black American G.I.-the reason was, this
was a black Third World bar, not an insignificant fact. The White House
immediately announced that they had evidence, intercepts and so on, that
showed that this terrorist act was perpetrated by Libya, though they never
presented any of this evidence.21 Then nine days later, on April 14th, we
bombed Libya.
It was completely obvious that we were going to bomb them. In fact, I
have a way of monitoring the Associated Press wires on my personal computer, and there were dispatches coming out all day because it was evident

Chapter Three
79
we were going to bomb them. So I don't know if you've ever looked at a
ticker-tape, but a story comes out about every minute, and all through the
day there were tons of stories coming out about Libya; the last one before
the bombing came through at 6:28 P.M. It was bylined West Berlin, and it
said: West German and U.S. military intelligence say they have no information about any Libyan connection to the disco bombing, but they suspect a
possible Libyan connection.22
Okay, half an hour later, at precisely 7 p.M.-rather crucial, it was at 7
P.M. precisely-the United States started bombing Libya. Why 7 P.M.? Because that's when the national news started on the three U.S. television networks: this was the first bombing in history ever timed for prime-time
television, and I mean that literally. It was a tricky operation to arrange: you
had to synchronize a six-hour flight from England so that a squadron of Flll bombers would arrive in Libya precisely at 7 P.M., when the three
national networks began their newscasts. They had to travel all the way
across the Mediterranean, two planes had to turn around and so on, but still
they hit it precisely at 7-that means there had to have been extremely
careful planning: they didn't want the bombing to start at ten after seven,
say, because that would have lost the effect.
Now, every journalist who isn't totally insane knew that this was a setup:
I mean, how likely is it that you would get a bombing at 7 P.M. Eastern
Standard Time, precisely on the nose? And if you watched the news that
evening, some of you will remember that the anchormen, Peter Jennings
and those guys, started off by saying: "Alright, we're going to switch over
to Tripoli"-then they switched over to Tripoli, and there was the whole
A.B.C. news team. What the hell were they doing in Tripoli? They're never
in Tripoli. Well, they were in Tripoli because they knew perfectly well
there was going to be a bombing, that's why. I mean, they didn't know the
exact minute, but everybody was in place in Tripoli because they knew the
place was going to be bombed. Of course, they all pretended it was this big
surpnse.
So, 7 P.M., the United States bombs Tripoli and Benghazi, kills plenty of
people: you go to the exciting events live, you hear the loud noises, the television news is preempted because this is so exciting. Then they flash back
to Washington, and the Reagan administration spokesman, Larry Speakes,
gets on T.V., and for the next twenty minutes they preempt the destruction
to give you the State Department line. Meanwhile, the whole Washington
press corps is just sitting there, these pussycats like Sam Donaldson and the
rest of them, who would never ask an embarrassing question in a million
years. Speakes gets up and says, "We knew for certain ten days ago that
Libya was behind the disco bombing"-and nobody asked the obvious
question: if you knew for certain ten days ago, how come you didn't know
half an hour ago? Barring colossal incompetence in the newsrooms, every
journalist there knew what I knew-they read the A.P. wires at C.B.S. as
much as I do, I guess, so that means they knew that up until a half-hour be-

80

Understanding Power

fore the bombing, American and West German intelligence had no information about a Libyan connection. But Larry Speakes gets up and says,
"We knew for certain ten days ago"-and none of them even batted an eyelash.23 Nobody asked another obvious question: how come the bombing was
scheduled for 7 P.M. Eastern Standard Time? How did you set it up so that
a six-hour flight from London happened to arrive in Libya at precisely the
instant when the television news started in the U.S.? Nobody asked that
question. In fact, there's a whole series of questions which nobody asked
everyone in the press just swallowed the absurdities. Then Reagan got on
and pontificated for a while. Next day's news, a hundred percent-everybody
said, this is terrific, we finally showed these Libyans. Not a note of discord.
24

Now, let me go on with the personal side of this. Two weeks later, I happened to go to Germany-where, incidentally, I was giving a talk at a conference on terrorism. When I got off at the airport in Frankfurt, the first
thing I did was pick up the German newspapers, and I also picked up Der
Spiegel, which is kind of like the German Newsweek. The front cover of
Der Spiegel was a picture of Reagan looking like some kind of madman
with missiles going over his head, and at the bottom was the phrase: "Terror
Against Terror.25 Now, that happens to be an old Gestapo slogan: when the
Gestapo went after the anti-Nazi resistance, they called it "terror against
terror." And I assume that everybody in Germany knew that it was a
Gestapo slogan-I guess that was the point, and especially when you looked
at the picture, the associations were pretty obvious: they were saying, "This
is like the Nazis." And the whole journal basically was devoted to
exploding the theory that Libya had anything to do with the disco bombing.
They said, there's no evidence for this, it's a total fabrication, Washington
has never provided any evidence. There were speculations as to who might
have done it, like it might have been drug-related, some people thought it
was Ku Klux Klan-related-the Klan is very strong there, coming out of the
American army-but there didn't seem to be any reason why Libya would
bomb a German Third World bar. And in fact, while I was in Germany, I
didn't meet a single person who thought that there was any plausibility
whatsoever to the Libyan connection.
Okay, I went to the conference on terrorism, and afterwards there was a
press conference. At the press conference, I was asked by German reporters
what I thought about all of this, and I told them the little bit I knew. After it
ended, a guy came up to me, a black American from Dorchester [in
Boston], and introduced himself. He was a G.I. who'd been living in
Germany for about twenty-five years-he'd served there, then decided he
didn't want to come back, so he stayed; a fair number of black Americans
have done that, actually. Now he was working as a reporter for Stars and
Stripes, the American army newspaper. Well, he told me that what I had
said about the bombing was part of the story, but that I didn't know the half
of it-it was much worse than I had said. I asked him what he meant, and he
said that as a reporter for Stars and Stripes, he had regularly been
interviewing the head

Chapter Three

81

of the hundred-person West German investigating team which was studying
the disco bombing [Manfred Ganschow], a man who also happened to be
the director of the West Berlin equivalent of the EB.I. [the Berlin Staatsschutz]. And he said that ever since the first day he began interviewing him,
this guy had been telling him: "There's no Libyan connection, there's no
evidence for it, we don't believe it." I asked him if he could get me something on paper about this that I could publish, and he said he would.
He flew to Berlin and conducted another interview with this guy, then
came back to Frankfurt where I was, and gave me the transcript of the interview. In it, he asked the guy: "Do you have any new information about a
Libyan connection?" And the guy said, "You've been asking me that ever
since the first day. I told you then we don't have any evidence, we still have
no evidence." The reporter kept pressing. He said, "Look, Helmut Kohl, the
Chancellor of Germany, now agrees that there's some plausibility to
Reagan's Libya story." And this guy said, "Well, politicians have to do what
they have to do, and they'll say their stuff, but I'm just telling you what the
facts are; the facts are, there's no evidence."26 And it goes on from there.
There never was any evidence. A couple months later it even began to be
conceded that there was no evidence. So maybe Syrians did it, or maybe it
was some other thing, but the idea that there was any credible Libyan
connection just disappeared.27
Actually, on the first anniversary of the bombing, the B.B.C. [British
Broadcasting Corporation] did a retrospective on the story in which they
reviewed all the background and went to European intelligence agencies for
assistance: their conclusion was that all of the European intelligence agencies-including those from the most conservative governments-say they see
no plausibility to the idea that there was a Libyan connection to the disco
bombing.28 The whole thing was a lie. Nevertheless, it continues to be
repeated in the U.S. press.29
In fact, the B.B.C. also presented some further interesting information. If
you were following all of this at the time, you'll remember that there was a
very dramatic story told in the U.S. media after the disco bombing about
how the United States had picked up secret intercepts that Libya was going
to bomb some target in West Berlin just before the bombing, so they had
declared an alert and were running around to all the places U.S. soldiers go
in West Berlin, and they got to the discotheque just fifteen minutes too lateyou remember that story?30 It turns out it was a total fabrication. The
B.B.C. investigated it: neither the German intelligence and police nor any
Western embassy had ever heard about it-it was all completely fabricated.
Well, the point is, all of this stuff was known to American reporters. The
New York Times had a top-flight correspondent in Germany, James
Markham, and he was interviewing the head of West German intelligence
too, except he was never reporting any of this.31 In fact, none of it was ever
reported, the press played the whole thing as if they were completely blindthey pretended all the way through that they didn't understand the business
about the timing; they didn't mention the fact that there was no ev-

82

Understanding Power

idence of a Libyan connection to the disco bombing right up to the moment
of the Tripoli attack; and they have yet to inform people that West Germany itself never saw any evidence of a connection, and has always regarded it as a total fabrication. All of that is just unstatable in the U.S.
media-and in this context, it's not very surprising that the American population still believes the official line. Well, here's an example of real brainwashing-and it's just got to be conscious in this case, I can't believe that the
press is that incompetent.
Actually, there's even one more part to the Tripoli bombing story, that I
know of at least. Remember the Pentagon's version of why we had to bomb
Libya the first time: it was that American planes had been flying over the
Gulf of Sidra to establish our right to be there, they were in international
waters forty miles off the Libyan coast, they detected Libyan planes pursuing them, they disabled the Libyan radar, then in international waters, the
Libyans shot at our planes-therefore we had to shoot them down and sink
their naval boats, and ultimately bomb Tripoli a few days later and kill lots
of Libyan civilians. That was the Pentagon's story. Well, a couple days after
that, a very good, highly respected British correspondent, a guy named
David Blundy, went to Libya to investigate the story, and he discovered the
following. It turns out that at the time of the first American attack, there
were a bunch of British engineers in Libya who were there making repairs
on the Libyan radar systems-it was Russian radar, but the Russians couldn't
figure out how to fix it, so they had to call in British engineers to fix it. So
these engineers were there working on the radar, and by the time of the
incident with the American fighter planes, the radar was working perfectly
well and they were in fact monitoring the whole episode right as it
transpired. And what they claim is that the American planes were not in international waters, they had in fact flown directly over Libyan ground territory: they had followed Libyan commercial jets at first so they wouldn't
be picked up on radar, then they revealed themselves when they were over
Libyan ground territory, and at that point they picked up ground fire.32 And
the purpose just had to be to elicit Libyan ground fire. Then when they'd
been shot at, they went back out to sea and bombed the boats and shot
down the planes and so on.
Well, that has never been reported in the United States. And that was
very cautious non-reporting-because the New York Times and others just
had to have been aware of this story, they just never mentioned any of this
information.
MAN: I have a student who was on active duty in the Mediterranean at that
time, and he says that the American Navy went within a very short physical
distance of the Libyan shoreline-not only within twelve miles, but within
three miles. He was right there on the deck and saw it.
That's probably the same story; that's interesting.

Chapter Three

83

WOMAN: What was the point of it, though?
The immediate point was pretty clear: right then the Reagan administration was trying to create fanaticism in time for the Congressional vote on
aid to the Nicaraguan contras, which was coming up a few days later. In
fact, if anyone didn't understand this, Reagan drew the connection explicitly in a speech he made. He said: you know these Libyans, they're even
trying to set up an outpost in our Hemisphere-namely, in Nicaragua.33 In
case anybody didn't understand ...
MAN: I understand the operation was a real military fiasco as well.
Yes, there's a very good study of that by Andrew Cockburn, who's quite
a good military correspondent.34 A couple of the planes broke down, the
bombs were going all over the place. I mean, they used laser-guided
bombs-"smart" bombs-and when laser-guided bombs miss, it means that
something got screwed up in the control mechanism, so they can go ten
miles away, they can go anywhere. I mean, no high-technology works for
very long, certainly not under complicated conditions, so all of these gadgets were screwing up and the servicemen couldn't figure out where they
were. The night radar didn't work, a plane was shot down-it goes on and
on. And remember, this was with no enemy opposition.
It was the same with the Grenada invasion [in 1983], actually-that was
also a military fiasco. I mean, seven thousand American elite troops succeeded, after three days, in overcoming the resistance of about three dozen
Cubans and a few Grenadan military men; they got 8,000 Medals of Honor
for it.35 They mostly shot themselves, or shot each other. They bombed a
mental hospital. The airplanes were on a different radio frequency than the
ground troops. They didn't know there were two medical campuses. In fact,
there was an official report about it later by some Pentagon guy [William
Lind], who just described it as a total fiasco.36
MAN: They had to use tourist maps.
They had the wrong maps-and this is like bombing the Rowe Conference
Center [i.e. where Chomsky and the group were meeting], about that hard.
MAN: Are these military planners rational?
There's a kind of rationality. But remember, they're not really expecting
to fight a war against anybody who can fight back-like, they're not planning
on fighting the Russians or anything like that. They're mostly doing
counterinsurgency stuff against defenseless targets like Libya and Grenada,
so it doesn't really matter whether the equipment works. The top brass

84

Understanding Power

in the Pentagon, they basically want a lot of high-powered, heavily
automated gadgetry that's expensive, because that's what makes you a big
bureaucracy and able to run a lot of things. I mean, there's an economic
purpose to the Pentagon, like I was talking about before: it's a way to get
the public to fund the development of high technology, and so on. But the
generals also want all this stuff too-it's kind of a power play. So these generals would rather have high-tech fancy aircraft than simple aircraft which
just do the job, because you're more powerful if you control more complicated stuff. The perception they encourage is that everything's getting
fancier and fancier, and more and more complicated, so they need more and
more money, and more and more assistance, and more and more control-and it doesn't really matter very much whether it works properly or not,
that's kind of secondary.37
WOMAN: Gore Vidal refers to us as "the proud victors of Grenada."
Yeah, that's when Reagan got up and said, "We're standing tall again."38
We're laughing-but remember, people didn't laugh at the time. The Grenada
invasion was considered a big shot in the arm: we're standing tall, they're
not going to push us around anymore, all hundred thousand of them. We
overcame their nutmeg.
The V.S. and the V.N.
MAN: Noam, do you see any positive role that the U.N. can play, for instance sending U.N. peacekeeping forces to places instead of u.s. intervention forces?
Well, the U.N. can only playa positive role if the great powers let it play
a positive role. So where the great powers more or less agree on something
and they just need a mechanism to effect~" , the U .... N. is useful. But if
the great powers are opposed-like, say the U "ted States is opposed to
something-okay, then it just doesn't happen.
MAN: What about if the U.N. didn't have a Security Council, or didn't give
veto power to the five permanent Security Council members? [The U.N. Security Council has 15 seats, 5 of which are permanently assigned to the
U.S., Britain, France, Russia, and China, and for "substantive" Security
Council resolutions to go into effect none of the 5 permanent members can
have voted against them; unlike the General Assembly, the Security Council has enforcement powers.]
It couldn't happen-because the great powers will not allow any interference with their affairs. Take the United States, which has been by far the

Chapter Three

85

leader in vetoing U.N. Security Council resolutions since the 1970s: if we
don't like what the U.N. is doing, the U.N. can go down the tubes-we just
ignore them, and that ends the matter.39 You don't kid around with an eighthundred-pound gorilla, you know.
In fact, it's quite interesting to trace the changes in the U.S. attitude towards the U.N. over the years. In the late 1940s, the United States just ran it
completely-international relations of power were such that the U.S. just
gave the orders and everybody followed, because the rest of the world was
smashed up and starving after the Second World War. And at the time,
everybody here loved the U.N., because it always went along with us: every
way we told countries to vote, they voted. Actually, when I was a graduate
student around 1950, major social scientists, people like Margaret Mead,
were trying to explain why the Russians were always saying "no" at the
U.N.-because ~ere was the United States putting through these resolutions
and everybody was voting "yes," then the Russians would stand up and say
"no." So of course they went to the experts, the social scientists, to figure it
out. And what they came up with was something we used to call
"diaperology"; the conclusion was, the reason the Russians always say "no"
at the U.N. is because they raise their infants with swaddling clothes
[bandages wrapped around newborn babies to restrain and quiet them].
Literally-they raise their infants with swaddling clothes in Russia, so Russians end up very negative, and by the time they make it to the U.N. all they
want to do is say "no" all the time. That was literally proposed, people took
it seriously, there were articles in the journals about it, and so on.40
Well, over the years, U.S. power over the U.N. began to drop-at least
relatively speaking. A lot of Third World countries entered the U.N., especially in the 1960s as a result of decolonization, so there was a lot more independence-and the U.N. just got out of control, we couldn't order it around
as much anymore. And as that happened, you could just trace the U.S.
attitude towards the U.N. getting more and more negative. For instance,
they started using this phrase which I'm sure you've heard, "the tyranny of
the majority." What's the tyranny of the majority? It's what's known as
"democracy" elsewhere, but when we happen to be in the minority, it
becomes "the tyranny of the majority." And starting around 1970, the
United States began vetoing everything that came up: resolutions on South
Africa, on Israel, on disarmament-you pick it, the United States was vetoing
it. And the Soviet Union was voting right along with the mainstream.41
Okay, all of a sudden it turns out that the U.N. is a total disaster.
I'll never forget one article about this in the New York Times Magazine,
by their U.N. correspondent, Richard Bernstein. He went through this
whole business about how the entire world votes against the United States
all the time. He wasn't asking, "How do they raise American children?"
What he asked was, "Why is the world out of step?" Literally: "What's the
matter with the world, it's all out of step, it doesn't understand-what is it
with the world?" Then he began looking for defects in the world. I'm not

86

Understanding Power

exaggerating, that's exactly what it was like-and all of this stuff is done
without any self-consciousness, it's just said straight.42
It's the same with the World Court [the popular name for the International Court of Justice, the judicial organ of the U.N.J. When the World
Court issued an explicit decision against the United States in June 1986 ordering-ordering-the United States to terminate what it called "unlawful use
of force" and illegal economic warfare against Nicaragua, we just said to
heck with it, we ignored them. The week after, Congress increased U.S. aid
to the contras by another hundred million dollars.43 Again, the commentary
across the board in the U.S.-the New York Times, the Washington Post, big
international law experts-was unanimous: the World Court has discredited
itself by passing this judgment, so obviously we don't have to pay any
attention to it.44 It just discredits the World Court to criticize the United
States-that's like a truism here. Then right after that, when the U.N.
Security Council called on all states to observe international law-not
referring to ~he United States, but obliquely referring to this World Court
decision=::;-,and it was vetoed by the United States (11 to 1, with 3 abstentions); and when the General Assembly also passed the same resolution, the
first time 94 to 3 (Israel, El Salvador, and the United States), the next time
94 to 2 (Israel and the United States)-the press wouldn't even report it. 45
Well, that's what it means to be a great power: you do whatever you feel
like.
And by now, the United States is practically strangling the U.N.-we're by
far its biggest debtor nation. In fact, the U.N. can barely function because
the United States won't pay its bills.46 And parts of the U.N. that we don't
like, like U.N.E.S.C.O. [the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and
Cultural Organization--because it's working for the Third World we
practically put them out of business.
The United States launched a huge propaganda campaign against
U.N.E.S.C.O. in the 1970s and Eighties-it was full of outrageous lies, totally fabricated, but nevertheless it sufficed to essentially eliminate the
Third World orientation of U.N.E.S.C.O. and make it stop doing things it
was doing around the Third World, like improving literacy and health care
and so on.47 But that's just the reality of what the U.N. is going to face when
it pursues policies that are not in the interests of the great powers-it can just
go down the drain, the United States won't permit it.
WOMAN: But why is it that the press won't report any of these things?
Well, it's because the press has a job: its job is to keep people from understanding the world, and to keep them indoctrinated. Therefore it won't
report things like this-and again, that follows pretty logically from the nature of the press institutions themselves. In fact, the way that the U.S. press
covers United Nations votes gives a very good illustration of how it works.
So for example, when the U.N. has a vote denouncing the ongoing Russian

Chapter Three

87

invasion of Afghanistan in November 1987, that they put on the front page.
But when the U.N. has a vote in the same session, in fact within a few days,
calling on all states to observe international law-this very muted resolution
after the World Court decision, it didn't even mention the United States
directly-then they won't put it on the front page, in fact they won't put it
anywhere.48
Or take the summit when the Soviet Union and the United States signed
the I.N.F. [Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces] treaty, in December 1987.
Right at that time, there was a tremendous amount of media attention focused on arms treaties. Well, the line that the U.S. media constantly presented was, "Reagan the Peacemaker"-you know, "Reagan leading us to a
new age," "First arms control treaty [to abolish a class of weapons systems]," and so on. That was the standard picture across the whole American
press. Okay, that very month, the U.N. General Assembly had passed a
series of disarmament resolutions-but if you want to know the details of
them, you'll have to look them up in my book Necessary Illusions, because
it's about the only place you can find them in print in the Unite States. The
General Assembly passed a resolution calling for the banning of all
weapons in outer space, Star Wars-it went through 154 to 1, the U.S. was
the 1. They passed a resolution against the development of new weapons of
mass destruction; it was 135 to 1. They passed one calling for a nuclear test
freeze; it was 137 to 3, the United States picked up England and France on
that one. And so it went.
Do you think any of that made the newspapers in the United States? No,
because that's just the wrong story.49 The story is "Reagan the Peacemaker,"
not "The United States is alone in the world, isolated in the world in
attempting to maintain the arms race" -that's not the story. And in fact,
when the New York Times did its summary report on what had happened at
the U.N. that year, you can bet your life that none of this stuff was included-there wasn't one word.50
And the point is, if you want to be a "responsible" journalist, you have to
understand what's important, and what's important is things that work for
the cause-U.S. corporate power, that's the cause. And you will not stay in
the press very long unless you've internalized and come to understand these
values virtually intuitively-because there's a whole elaborate process of
filtering and selection in the institutions to eliminate people who don't
understand them and to help advance people who do. That's how you can
get commentators in the New York Times asking questions like "What's
wrong with the world?" when the U.S. is standing alone against every other
country, and not even batting an eyelash. And of course, it's also part of the
way the propaganda system keeps everyone else from understanding the elementary realities too.

~'

88

Understanding Power
Business, Apartheid, and Racism

WOMAN: Professor Chomsky, one issue where I've noticed that activists
get kind of a good press in the United States-and it seems out of synch with
what we usually see-is coverage of people protesting South African
apartheid {official system of racial segregation and white supremacy, the
legal basis for which was largely repealed in 1990-91]. I'm wondering if
you have any ideas why coverage of that might be a bit more positive.
I think you're right: anti-apartheid movements in the United States do get
a pretty good press-so when some mayor or something demonstrates
against South Africa, there's usually kind of a favorable report on it. And I
think the main reason is that Western corporations themselves are basically
anti-apartheid by this point, so that's going to tend to be reflected in the
media coverage.
See, South Africa has been going through an internal economic transformation, from a society based on extractive industry to one based on
industrial production-and that transformation has changed the nature of
international interests in South Africa. As long as South Africa was
primarily a society whose wealth was based on extracting diamonds, gold,
uranium and so on, what you needed were large numbers of slaves,
basically-people who would go down into the mines and work for a couple
years, then die and be replaced by others. So you needed an illiterate,
subdued population of workers, with families getting just enough income to
produce more slaves, but not much more than that-then either you sent
them down into the mines, or you turned them into mercenaries in the army
and so on to help control the others. That was traditional South Africa. But
as South Africa changes to an industrial society, those needs also are beginning to change: now you don't need slaves primarily, what you need is a
docile, partially educated workforce.
Something similar happened in the United States during our industrial
revolution, actually. Mass public education first was introduced in the
United States in the nineteenth century as a way of training the largely rural
workforce here for industry-in fact, the general population in the United
States largely was opposed to public education, because it meant taking
kids off the farms where they belonged and where they worked with their
families, and forcing them into this setting in which they were basically
being trained to become industrial workers.51 That was part of the whole
transformation of American society in the nineteenth century, and that
transformation now is taking place for the black population in South
Africa-which means for about 85 percent of the people there. So the white
South African elites, and international investors generally, now need a
workforce that is trained for industry, not just slaves for the mines. And that
means they need people who can follow instructions, and read diagrams,
and be managers and foremen, things like that-so slavery just is

Chapter Three

89

not the right system for the country anymore, they need to move towards
something more like what we have in the United States. And it's pretty
much for that reason that the West has become anti-apartheid, and that the
media will therefore tend to give anti-apartheid movements a decent press.
I mean, usually political demonstrations get very negative reporting in
the United States, no matter what they're for, because they show people
they can do things, that they don't just have to be passive and isolated-and
you're not supposed to have that lesson, you're supposed to think that you're
powerless and can't do anything. So any kind of public protest typically
won't be covered here, except maybe locally, and usually it will get very
negative reporting; when it's protest against the policies of a favored U.S.
ally, it always will. But in the case of South Africa, the reporting is quite
supportive: so if people go into corporate shareholder meetings or
something and make a fuss about disinvestment [withdrawing investments
from South Africa to pressure its government], generally they'll get a favorable press these days.
Of course, it's not that what they're doing is wrong-what they're doing is
right. But they should understand that the reason they're getting a reasonably favorable press right now is that, by this point, business regards
them as its troops-corporate executives don't really want apartheid in South
Africa anymore. It's like the reason that business was willing to support the
Civil Rights Movement in the United States: American business had no use
for Southern apartheid, in fact it was bad for business.
See, capitalism is not fundamentally racist-it can exploit racism for its
purposes, but racism isn't built into it. Capitalism basically wants people to
be interchangeable cogs, and differences among them, such as on the basis
of race, usually are not functional. I mean, they may be functional for a period, like if you want a super-exploited workforce or something, but those
situations are kind of anomalous. Over the long term, you can expect capitalism to be anti-racist-just because it's anti-human. And race is in fact a
human characteristic-there's no reason why it should be a negative characteristic, but it is a human characteristic. So therefore identifications based
on race interfere with the basic ideal that people should be available just as
consumers and producers, interchangeable cogs who will purchase all of
the junk that's produced-that's their ultimate function, and any other
properties they might have are kind of irrelevant, and usually a nuisance.
So in this respect, I think you can expect that anti-apartheid moves will
be reasonably well supported by the mainstream institutions in the United
States. And over the long term, I suspect that apartheid in South Africa will
break down-just for functional reasons. Of course, it's going to be really
rough, because white privilege in South Africa is extreme, and the situation
of blacks is grotesque. But over time, I assume that the apartheid system
will erode-and I think we should press very hard to make that happen: like,
one doesn't turn against the Civil Rights Movement because you realize
that business interests are in favor of it. That's kind of not the point.

90

Understanding Power
Winning the Vietnam War

WOMAN: Mr. Chomsky, what's really going on in Vietnam-is it just the
horrible dictatorship it's portrayed to be, and do you see any prospects at
all for social or economic recovery there?
Well, Vietnam's a pretty tight and autocratic place-but it was obvious
that it was going to be that way. Don't forget, what we did to that country
practically wiped it out. You have to bear in mind what happened there.
Nobody here cares, so nobody studies it carefully, but over the course of
the Indochina wars the number of people killed was maybe four million or
more. ["Indochina" was the French colony comprising the area of Vietnam,
Cambodia, and Laos; the United States attacked each of those countries in
the 1960s and Seventies.] Tens of millions of others were displaced from
their homes. Large parts of the country were simply destroyed. There are
still thousands and thousands of deaths every year because of our use of
chemical weapons--children are born with birth defects, and cancers, and
tumors, deformities. I mean, Vietnam suffered the kind of fate there's nothing to compare to in European history back to the Black Plague. It'll be a
century before they can recover-if then. 52
In fact, by about 1970, my own view, and I wrote this at the time, was
that either nothing in the region would survive-which was a possibility or
else the only thing that would survive would be North Vietnam, which is a
harsh, orthodox Marxist-Leninist regime. And the reason why only North
Vietnam would have survived is because under conditions of tremendous
violence, the only thing that survives is the toughest people.53
See, libertarian structures are not very resilient-they can easily be wiped
out by violence, whereas tough authoritarian structures can often survive
that violence; in fact, one of the effects of violence is to magnify the power
of authoritarian groups. For example, suppose we came under physical
attack here-suppose a bunch of gangsters came and wanted to kill us, and
we had to find a way to survive. I suspect that what we would do (at least
what I would do) is to look for whoever around here is the toughest bastard,
and put them in charge-because they'd be the most likely to help us survive.
That's what you do if you want to survive a hostile attack: you subject yourself to power and authority, and to people who know how to fight. That's in
fact the result of a hostile attack: the ones left in command at the end are
the elements who were capable of surviving, and usually they survived
because they're very violent. Well, our attack on Vietnam was
extraordinarily violent, and the more constructive National Liberation Front
in South Vietnam just couldn't survive it, but the tough authoritarian regime
of the North could-so it took over.
And because the pressures on them have never let up since the war, if
there ever were any possibilities for recovery afterwards, the United States
has ensured that Vietnam could never do anything with them. Because U.S.

Chapter Three
91
policy since the war has been to make Vietnam suffer as much as possible,
and to keep them isolated from the rest of the world: it's what's called
"bleeding Vietnam."54 The Chinese leadership is much more frank about it
than we are-for example, Deng Xiaoping [China's dominant political figure
until the 1990s] says straight out that the reason for supporting Pol Pot in
Cambodia is that he's Vietnam's enemy, and he'll help us make Vietnam
suffer as much as possible. We're not quite as open about it, but we take
basically the same position-and for only slightly different reasons. China
wants Vietnam to suffer because they're an ideological competitor, and they
don't like having an independent state like that on their border; the United
States wants them to suffer because we're trying to increase the difficulty of
economic reconstruction in Southeast Asia-so we'll support Pol Pot through
allies like China and Thailand, in order to "bleed" Vietnam more
effectively. 55 [Pol Pot was the Cambodian Khmer Rouge Party leader responsible for a mass slaughter in that country in the mid-1970s.]
I mean, remember what the Vietnam War was fought for, after all. The
Vietnam War was fought to prevent Vietnam from becoming a successful
model of economic and social development for the Third World. And we
don't want to lose the war, Washington doesn't want to lose the war. So far
we've won: Vietnam is no model for development, it's a model for destruction. But if the Vietnamese could ever pull themselves together somehow,
Vietnam could again become such a model-and that's no good, we always
have to prevent that.56
The extent of the sadism on this is extraordinary, in fact. For example,
India tried to send a hundred buffalo to Vietnam, because the buffalo herds
there had been virtually wiped out-Vietnam's a peasant society, remember,
so buffalo mean tractors, fertilizer, and so on; the United States threatened
to cut off "Food for Peace" aid to India if they did it. We tried to block
Mennonites from sending wheat to Vietnam. We've effectively cut off all
foreign aid to them over the past twenty years, by pressuring other countries
not to give them anything. 57 And the only purpose of all these things has
been to make Vietnam suffer as much as possible, and to prevent them from
ever developing-and they've just been unable to deal with it. Whatever
minuscule hopes they might have had have been eliminated, because
they've made error after error in terms of economic reconstruction. I mean,
in the last couple years, they've tried to fool around with liberalizing markets to attract foreign investors and so on, but it's pretty hard to envision
any positive scenario for them.
Look, to try to deal with economic problems in general is not so simplethe United States is doing a rotten job of it, with all the advantages in the
world. And to deal with problems of economic reconstruction under
conditions of total devastation, and lack of resources, and imposed isolation
from the world-that's very, very hard. I mean, economic development in the
West was a very brutal process, and that was under pretty good conditions.
For example, the American colonies in the eighteenth century were

92

Understanding Power

objectively better off than most Third World countries today-that's in absolute terms, not relative terms, meaning you had to work less to feed yourself, things like that. 58 And economic development here still was very
brutal, even with those enormous advantages. And remember, that was with
all of the resources in the world still around to be robbed-nobody has that
anymore, they've all been robbed already. So there are just real, qualitative
differences in the problems of Third World development today-and the
Vietnamese have problems far beyond that, problems they simply cannot
overcome at this point, as far as I can see.
[Editors' Note: Official U.S. relations with Vietnam changed in February
1994, as American businesses pressured the government to allow them to
join foreign-based corporations that were violating the embargo and making profits off Vietnam:59]
"Genocide": the United States and Pol Pot
MAN: You said that we support Pol Pot in Cambodia through our allies.
Isn't there a chance that there could be another genocide there if the
Khmer Rouge gets back in power? I'm terrified of that possibility.
Yeah, it's dangerous. What will happen there depends on whether the
West continues to support them ...
MAN: But we may be heading for another genocide.
Well, look, the business about "genocide" you've got to be a little careful
about. Pol Pot was obviously a major mass murderer, but it's not clear that
Pol Pot killed very many more people-or even more people-than the United
States killed in Cambodia in the first half of the 1970s. We only talk about
"genocide" when other people do the killing. [The U.S. bombed and
invaded Cambodia beginning in 1969, and supported anti-Parliamentary
right-wing forces in a civil war there which lasted until 1975; Pol Pot ruled
the country between 1975 and '78.]
So there's a lot of uncertainty about just what the scale was of the Pol
Pot massacre, but the best scholarly work in existence today estimates the
deaths in Cambodia from all causes during the Pol Pot period in the hundreds of thousands, maybe as much as a million.6o Well, just take a look at
the killing in Cambodia that happened in the first half of the decade from
1970 to 1975-which is the period that we're responsible for: it was also in
the hundreds of thousands.61
Furthermore, if you really want to be serious about it-let's say a million
people died in the Pol Pot years, let's take a higher number-it's worth bearing in mind that when the United States stopped its attacks on inner Cambodia in 1975, American and other Western officials predicted that in the

Chapter Three
93
aftermath, about a million more Cambodians would die just from the effects
of the American war.62 At the time that the United States withdrew from
Cambodia, people were dying from starvation in the city of Phnom Penh
alone-forget the rest of the country-at the rate of 100,000 a year. 63 The last
U.S. A.J.D. [Agency for International Development] mission in Cambodia
predicted that there would have to be two years of slave labor and
starvation before the country could even begin to get moving again.64 So
while the number of deaths you should attribute to the United States during
the Pol Pot period isn't a simple calculation to make, obviously it's a lotwhen you wipe out a country's agricultural system and drive a million
people out of their homes and into a city as refugees, yeah, a lot of people
are going to die. And the responsibility for their deaths is not with the
regime that took over afterwards, it's with the people who made it that way.
And in fact, there's an even more subtle point to be made-but not an insignificant one. That is: why did Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge carry out
their massacre in the first place? Well, there's pretty good evidence that the
Khmer Rouge forces took power primarily because they were the only ones
who were tough enough bastards to survive the U.S. attacks. And given the
destructive psychological effects of the American bombings on the peasant
population there, some sort of violent outpouring was fairly predictable and
there was a big element of just plain peasant revenge in what happened.65
So the U.S. bombings hit a real peak of ferocity in around 1973, and that's
the same period in which the Pol Pot group started gaining power. The
American bombardment was certainly a significant factor, possibly the
critical factor, in building up peasant support for the Khmer Rouge in the
first place; before that, they had been a pretty marginal element. Okay, if
we were honest about the term "genocide," we would divide up the deaths
in the Pol Pot period into a major part which is our responsibility, which is
the responsibility of the United States.
Heroes and Anti-Heroes
MAN: Noam, I have to say, I'm getting a little depressed by all of this negative information-we need it, there's no question about it, but we also need
a certain degree of empowerment. So let me just ask you, who are your
heroes?
Well, let me first just make a remark about the "empowerment" point,
which comes up again and again. I never know exactly how to respond to
it-because it's just the wrong question. The point is, there are lots of opportunities to do things, and if people do something with them, changes
will happen. No matter how you look at it, it seems to me that's always
what it comes down to.

94

Understanding Power

MAN: Well, I guess I'm asking about your heroes so that you'll be a little
bit more specific about some of these "opportunities." For example, who do
you really admire when it comes to activism?
Well, my heroes are people who were working with S.N.C.C. [the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, a Civil Rights Movement organization] in the South-people who day after day faced very harsh conditions
and suffered badly, some of them were even killed. They'll never enter into
history, but I knew some of them, I saw some of them-they're heroes. Draft
resisters during the Vietnam War I think are heroes. Plenty of people in the
Third World are heroes: if you ever have the chance to go to a place where
people are really struggling-like the West Bank, Nicaragua, Laos-there's an
awful lot of heroism, just an awful lot of heroism. Among sort of middleclass organizers, there are three or four people I know who would get the
Nobel Peace Prize if it meant anything, which of course it doesn't, in fact
it's kind of an insult to get it-take a look at who it goes to. 66 If you look
around, there are people like that: if you want heroes, you can find them.
You're not going to find them among anybody whose name is mentioned in
the newspapers-if they're there, you know probably they're not heroes,
they're anti-heroes.
I mean, there are plenty of people who when some popular movement
gets going are willing to stand up and say, "I'm your leader"-the Eugene
McCarthy phenomenon. Eugene McCarthy [a contender for the Democratic
Party Presidential nomination in 1968] is a perfect example of it. I remember John Kenneth Galbraith [American economist] once saying,
"McCarthy's the real hero of the Vietnam War opposition," and American
liberalism always writes about him as a great hero.67 Well, if you take a
look at McCarthy's history, you can understand why. During the hard years
of building up the anti-war movement, nobody ever heard of Eugene
McCarthy. There were some people in Congress involved in opposing the
war, but it wasn't McCarthy; in fact, it wasn't even McGovern, if you want
to know the truth-it was Wayne Morse, Ernest Gruening, Gaylord Nelson,
maybe a couple of others, but certainly not McCarthy. In fact, you never
even heard of Eugene McCarthy until around the time of the Tet Offensive
[in January 1968]. Around the time of the Tet Offensive, corporate America
turned against the war, there was a huge mass popular movement out there,
and Eugene McCarthy figured that he could get some personal power out of
it, so he announced himself as "Your Leader." He didn't really say
anything-if you look back, you don't even know which side he was on, if
you read the words-but somehow he managed to put across the impression
that he was this big anti-war leader.
He won the New Hampshire primary in '68 and went to the Democratic
National Convention. At the Democratic Convention, lots and lots of young
people showed up to work on his campaign-you know, "Clean for Gene"
and so on-and they got battered bloody by the Chicago police [in a police
riot with anti-war demonstrators]. McCarthy didn't bat an eyelash,

he came down to talk to them. He didn't win at the 1968 Convention, so he
disappeared. He had a lot of prestige at that point-totally ,-but he had a lot of
prestige as the self-elected spokesman of the anti-war movement, and if he'd
cared even marginally about anything ring, he would have used that
undeserved status to work against the war. But he quit: the power game was
over, it was more fun to write poetry and talk about baseball, so that's what
he did. And that's why he's a liberal hero--because he's a total fraud. I mean,
you couldn't have a more clear example of a total fraud.
Those are the kind of "heroes" that the culture is going to set up for
you--the kind who show up when there are points to be gotten and power
to be gotten, and who try to exploit popular movements for their own personal power-trips, and therefore marginalize the popular movements. Then
if things don't work out for them, they go on and do something else: that's
a "hero." Or you know, after you get shot, after you're killed, like Martin
Luther King, then you can become a hero-but not while you're alive. Remember, despite all of the mythology today, Martin Luther King was
strongly opposed while he was alive: the Kennedy administration really disliked him, they tried to block him in every possible way. I mean, eventually
the Civil Rights Movement became powerful enough that they had to
pretend that they liked him, so there was sort of a period of popularity for
King when he was seen to be focusing on extremely narrow issues, like
racist sheriffs in the South and so on. But as soon as he turned to broader
issues, whether it was the Vietnam War, or planning the Poor People's Campaign [a 1968 encampment and protest march on Washington], or other
lings like that, he became a total pariah, and was actively opposed.68
I. F. Stone is another case like that. I. F. Stone is a great hero of the press--they all talk about, "Boy, if we only had more people like Izzy Stone" and
so on. But if you take a look at the actual record, it's kind of revealing; I did
it once. Up until 1971, Izzy Stone was a total outcast, his name wasn't even
mentioned-and the reason is, he was publishing his radical news weekly [1.
E Stone's Weekly]. There were a lot of journalists ripping it off, but this guy
was a Communist, so you don't ever want to mention him. Then in 1971, he
couldn't continue putting out the Weekly anymore because he and his wife
were getting too old, so they stopped publishing it-and within a year he won
the George Polk Award, there were films being made about him, he was
being hailed everywhere as the great maverick reporter who proved what a
terrific press we had, "if only we had more people like him," and so on.
Everybody just plays along with the farce, everybody plays along.
"Anti-Intellectualism"
WOMAN: Noam, I've noticed that in general there's a strong strain of antiintellectualism in American society.

96

Understanding Power

When you say there's "anti-intellectualism," what exactly does that
mean? Does it mean people think Henry Kissinger shouldn't be allowed to
be National Security Advisor?
WOMAN: Well, I feel there's a sense in which you're looked down on if you
deal with ideas. Like, I'll go back and tell the people I work with that I
spent the whole weekend listening to someone talk about foreign policy,
and they won't look at that in a positive way.
Yeah, because you should have been out making money, or watching
sports or something. But see, I don't call that "anti-intellectual," that's just
being de-politicized-what's especially "intellectual" about being concerned
with the world? If we had functioning labor unions, the working class
would be concerned with the world. In fact, they are in many places-Salvadoran peasants are concerned with the world, they're not "intellectuals."
These are funny words, actually. I mean, the way it's used, being an "intellectual" has virtually nothing to do with working with your mind: those
are two different things. My suspicion is that plenty of people in the crafts,
auto mechanics and so on, probably do as much or more intellectual work
as plenty of people in universities. There are big areas in academia where
what's called "scholarly" work is just clerical work, and I don't think clerical work's more challenging mentally than fixing an automobile engine-in
fact, I think the opposite: I can do clerical work, I can never figure out how
to fix an automobile engine.
So if by "intellectual" you mean people who are using their minds, then
it's all over the society. If by "intellectual" you mean people who are a special class who are in the business of imposing thoughts, and framing ideas
for people in power, and telling everyone what they should believe, and so
on, well, yeah, that's different. Those people are called "intellectuals"-but
they're really more a kind of secular priesthood, whose task is to uphold the
doctrinal truths of the society. And the population should be anti-intellectual in that respect, I think that's a healthy reaction.
In fact, if you compare the United States with France-or with most of
Europe, for that matter-I think one of the healthy things about the United
States is precisely this: there's very little respect for intellectuals as such.
And there shouldn't be. What's there to respect? I mean, in France if you're
part of the intellectual elite and you cough, there's a front-page story in Le
Monde. That's one of the reasons why French intellectual culture is so farcical-it's like Hollywood. You're in front of the television cameras all the
time, and you've got to keep doing something new so they'll keep focusing
on you and not on the guy at the next table, and people don't have ideas that
are that good, so they have to come up with crazy stuff, and the intellectuals get all pompous and self-important. So I remember during the Vietnam War, there'd be these big international campaigns to protest the war,

Chapter Three

97

and a number of times I was asked to co-sign letters with, say, Jean-Paul
Sartre [French philosopher]. Well, we'd co-sign some statement, and in
France it was front-page news; here, nobody even mentioned it. And the
French thought that was scandalous; I thought it was terrific-why the hell
should anybody mention it? What difference does it make if two guys who
happen to have some name recognition got together and signed a statement? Why should that be of any particular interest to anybody? So I think
the American reaction is much healthier in this respect.
WOMAN: But I want to point out that you've told us about a number of
books this weekend which support some of the contentions you're making:
you would not know a lot of these things if you hadn't read that material.
That's right-but you see, that's a reflection of privilege, not a reflection of
intellectual life. The fact is that if you're at a university, you're very privileged. For one thing, contrary to what a lot of people say, you don't have to
work all that hard. And you control your own work-I mean, maybe you
decide to work eighty hours a week, but you decide which eighty hours.
That makes a tremendous difference: it's one of the few domains where you
control your own work. And furthermore, you have a lot of resources-you've got training, you know how to use a library, you see the ads for
books so you know which books are probably worth reading, you know
there are declassified documents because you learned that in school
somewhere, and you know how to find them because you know how to use
a reference library. And that collection of skills and privileges gives you
access to a lot of information. But it has nothing to do with being
"intellectual": there are plenty of people in the universities who have all of
this stuff, and use all of these things, and they do clerical work. Which is
perfectly possible-you can get the declassified documents, and you can
copy them, and compare them, and then make a notation about some
footnote referring to something else. That's in fact most of the scholarship
in these fields-take a look at the monographs sometime, there's not a
thought in people's heads. I think there's less real intellectual work going on
in a lot of university departments than there is in trying to figure out what's
the matter with my car, which requires some creativity.
WOMAN: Okay, let's accept that the auto mechanic is an intellectualthen I think on the other side, we also have to accept that those people who
deal with books correctly, and aren't the clerical workers, are also
intellectuals.
Well, if by "intellectual" you just want to refer to people who use their
minds, yeah, okay. But in that sense, I don't think that people are antiintellectual. For example, if you take your car to a really hot-shot mechanic
who's the only guy in your town who can ever figure out what's wrong-the

98

Understanding Power

guys in the car manufacturing place can never do it, but this guy's just got a
real feel for automobiles; he looks at your car, and starts taking it apart ...
WOMAN: She ...
Or she, or whatever-you don't look down on that person. Nobody looks
down on that person. You admire them.
WOMAN: But people do look down on people who read books.
But look, this guy may have read books-maybe he read the manual.
Those manuals are not so easy to read; in fact, they're harder to read than
most scholarly books, I think.
But I'm not trying to disagree, I just think that we should look at the
thing a little differently. There's intellectual work, which plenty of people
do; then there's what's called "intellectual life," which is a special craft
which doesn't particularly require thought-in fact, you're probably better off
if you don't think too much-and that's what's called being a respected
intellectual. And people are right to look down on that, because there's
nothing very special about it. It's just a not very interesting craft, not very
well done usually.
In my own view, it's wrong if a society has these kinds of differentiations. My own early background was in a kind of Jewish working-class environment, where the people were not formally educated and they were
workers-like somebody could be a shop-boy, or a seamstress or something
like that-but they were very literate: I would call them intellectuals. They
weren't "intellectuals" in the sense that people usually talk about, but they
were very well-read, they thought about things, they argued about things--I
don't see any reason why that can't be what you do when you're a seamstress.
Spectator Sports
WOMAN: Could you talk a bit more about the role that sports play in
the society in de-politicizing people-it seems to me it's more significant
than people usually assume.
That's an interesting one, actually-I don't know all that much about it
personally, but just looking at the phenomenon from the outside, it's obvious that professional sports, and non-participation sports generally, playa
huge role. I mean, there's no doubt they take up just a tremendous amount
of attention.
In fact, I have the habit when I'm driving of turning on these radio callin programs, and it's striking when you listen to the ones about sports. They

Chapter Three

99

have these groups of sports reporters, or some kind of experts on a panel, and
people call in and have discussions with them. First of all, the audience
obviously is devoting an enormous amount of time to it all. But the more
striking fact is, the callers have a tremendous amount of expertise, they have
detailed knowledge of all kinds of things, they carryon these extremely complex
discussions. And strikingly, they're not at all in awe of the experts-which is a
little unusual. See, in most parts of the society, you're encouraged to defer to
experts: we all do it more than we should. But in this area, people don't seem to
do it-they're quite happy to have an argument with the coach of the Boston
Celtics, and tell him what he should have done, and enter into big debates with
him and so on. So the fact is that in this domain, people somehow feel quite
confident, and they know a lot--there's obviously a great deal of intelligence
going into it.
Actually, it reminds me in some ways of things that you find in nonliterate or non-technological cultures-what are called "primitive" cultureswhere for example, you get extremely elaborate kinship systems. Some
anthropologists believe these systems have to do with incest taboos and so
on, but that's kind of unlikely, because they're just elaborated way beyond
any functional utility. And when you look at the structure of them, they
seem like a kind of mathematics. It's as though people want to work out
mathematical problems, and if they don't have calculus and arithmetic, they
work them out with other structures. And one of the structures everybody
has is relationships of kinship-so you work out your elaborate structures
around that, and you develop experts, and theories, and so on. Or another
thing you sometimes find in non-literate cultures is developments of the
most extraordinary linguistic systems: often there's tremendous sophistication about language, and people play all sorts of games with language. So
there are puberty rites where people who go through the same initiation period develop their own language that's usually some modification of the actual language, but with quite complex mental operations differentiating itthen that's theirs for the rest of their lives, and not other people's. And what
all these things look like is that people just want to use their intelligence
somehow, and if you don't have a lot of technology and so on, you do other
things.
Well, in our society, we have things that you might use your intelligence ~
on, like politics, but people really can't get involved in them in a very serious
way--so what they do is they put their minds into other things, such as sports.
You're trained to be obedient; you don't have an interesting job; there's no work
around for you that's creative; in the cultural environment you're a passive
observer of usually pretty tawdry stuff; political and social life are out of your
range, they're in the hands of the rich folk. So what's left? Well, one thing that's
left is sports--so you put a lot of the intelligence and the thought and the selfconfidence into that. And I suppose that's also one of the basic functions it
serves in the society in general: it occupies the population, and keeps them from
trying to get involved with things that re-

100

Understanding Power

ally matter. In fact, I presume that's part of the reason why spectator sports
are supported to the degree they are by the dominant institutions.
And spectator sports also have other useful functions too. For one thing,
they're a great way to build up chauvinism-you start by developing these
totally irrational loyalties early in life, and they translate very nicely to
other areas. I mean, I remember very well in high school having a sudden
kind of Erlebnis, you know, a sudden insight, and asking myself, why do I
care if my high school football team wins? I don't know anybody on the
team. They don't know me. I wouldn't know what to say to them if I met
them. Why do I care? Why do I get all excited if the football team wins and
all downcast if it loses? And it's true, you do: you're taught from childhood
that you've got to worry about the Philadelphia Phillies, where I was. In
fact, there's apparently a psychological phenomenon of lack of selfconfidence or something which affected boys of approximately my age who
grew up in Philadelphia, because every sports team was always in last
place, and it's kind of a blow to your ego when that happens, people are
always lording it over you.
But the point is, this sense of irrational loyalty to some sort of meaningless community is training for subordination to power, and for chauvinism.
And of course, you're looking at gladiators, you're looking at guys who can
do things you couldn't possibly do-like, you couldn't pole-vault seventeen
feet, or do all these crazy things these people do. But it's a model that you're
supposed to try to emulate. And they're gladiators fighting for your cause,
so you've got to cheer them on, and you've got to be happy when the opposing quarterback gets carted off the field a total wreck and so on. All of
this stuff builds up extremely anti-social aspects of human psychology. I
mean, they're there; there's no doubt that they're there. But they're emphasized, and exaggerated, and brought out by spectator sports: irrational
competition, irrational loyalty to power systems, passive acquiescence to
quite awful values, really. In fact, it's hard to imagine anything that contributes more fundamentally to authoritarian attitudes than this does, in
addition to the fact that it just engages a lot of intelligence and keeps people
away from other things.
So if you look at the whole phenomenon, it seems to me that it plays
quite a substantial social role. I don't think it's the only thing that has this
kind of effect. Soap operas, for example, do it in another domain-they teach
people other kinds of passivity and absurdity. As a matter of fact, if you
really want to do a serious media critique right across the board, these are
the types of things which occupy most of the media, after all-most of it isn't
shaping the news about El Salvador for politically articulate people, it's
diverting the general population from things that really matter. So this is
one respect in which the work that Ed Herman and I have done on the
media is really defective-we don't talk about it much. But this stuff is a
major part of the whole indoctrination and propaganda system, and it's
worth examining more closely. There are people who've written about it,

Chapter Three
101
Neil Postman and others-I just don't feel enough acquaintance with it to say
more.69
Western European Activism and Canada
MAN: Professor Chomsky, I'm wondering whether there are any lessons
about activism that you think we should learn from Western Europe-they
seem to be very far ahead of us in terms of political organizing and
strategies.
No, I don't agree-we're always looking for a savior somewhere, and there
isn't any. I mean, there are a lot of things that have developed in the United
States which have not developed in Western Europe, and the popular
movements here are much healthier in many respects than the European
ones-theirs are very ideology-ridden: they've got "texts," and "theories,"
and all kinds of stuff that we don't have, which we're lucky we don't have.
There's really been a lot of very successful organizing here over the years.
MAN: But there are mass demonstrations there.
Yeah, but we've had mass demonstrations too-we just had one in
Washington a couple days ago [in support of abortion rights]. We know
how to do that stuff; it's not very hard. I mean, there are no big secrets
about any of this: there are very few lessons to transmit, so far as I know.
Look, people have been involved in very successful organizing in the
United States: the Civil Rights Movement, the anti-war movement, the
ecological movement, the feminist movement, all of these things have been
very successful developments.
MAN: What about all the West European social-welfare policies, though?
It's true, they have a lot of social-welfare programs we don't have-but
that's true of Canada too, you don't even have to go all the way to Europe.
For instance, they have a functioning public health insurance program in
Canada, which we don't have here in the United States. But see, that has to
do with the extreme power of private capital here, and with the fact that the
capitalist class in the United States is extraordinarily class-conscious, while
the working class is very diffuse and weak. So the result is, we don't have a
lot of things that by now are pretty much taken for granted in every other
industrial country: we have more homeless and less health.
Now, you can look at the specific historical particularities in the United
States that have made it that way-and that's worth doing-but really it's not a
big secret how to go about getting those kinds of programs. And if

102

Understanding Power

you want to understand what a reasonably rational national health care
program would look like, you don't have to go very far. There's a good
start, at least, right across the border.
MAN: Why does Canada have programs like that, though?
Well, there you have to look at the history: you have to ask, how has the
history of Canada been different from the history of the United States? And
there have been a lot of differences. For instance, one difference had to do
with the American Revolution-in the American Revolution, a large number
of people fled to Canada, lots in fact. And a lot of them fled because they
didn't like the doctrinaire, kind of fanatic environment that took hold
in the colonies. The percentage of colonists who fled in the American
Revolution was actually about 4 percent, it was probably higher than the
percentage of Vietnamese who fled Vietnam after the Vietnam War. And
remember, they were fleeing from one of the richest places in the worldthese were boat-people who fled in terror from Boston Harbor in the middle
of winter to Nova Scotia, where they died in the snow trying to get away
from all of these crazies here. The numbers are supposed to have been in
the neighborhood of maybe a hundred thousand out of a total population of
about two and a half million-so it was a substantial part of the population.
And among them were people from groups who knew they were going to
get it in the neck if the colonists won-blacks and Native Americans, for
example.70 And they were right: in the case of the Native Americans, it was
genocide; in the case of blacks, it was slavery.
And actually, that wasn't the only big migration to Canada which contributed to some of the differences-there was also another major one around
the turn of the century, coming out of the American Midwest after the
Populist movement collapsed [the Populists were a political movement that
formed out of agrarian protest in the 1880s and broke apart after 1896]. The
Populists were the last gasp of large-scale popular democratic politics in the
United States, and they were mainly centered in the Midwest-radical
Kansas farmers and that sort of thing. And when they were finally defeated
and the Populist Party dissolved, a lot of them just left. I don't know the
numbers in this case, but a fair number of them went to Canada, and in fact
they became part of the basis for the Canadian social-democratic movement
which developed after that, and was responsible for pushing through a lot of
the social-welfare programs in Canada.71
Apart from that, there are a lot of other things that have made Canada
different. For instance, the United States has always been a much more advanced capitalist country, by far--corporations in the modern sense were an
American invention, and ever since the beginning of the industrial revolution, corporate America has always been much more powerful than its
Canadian counterpart. This was a much richer country; we kept trying to
invade Canada; Canada's much more sparsely settled and much less popu-

Chapter Three
103
lous than the United States; it was part of the British Empire; they have the
French-English split, with Quebec there; and so on. So there are a lot of
historical and other differences between the two of them, and I think it's a
good question to look into in more detail. But the fact is, there are advantages and disadvantages to the two countries. A lot of things have been won
in the United States that are good, and are a model for other places-and as
far as organizing is concerned, it's the kind of thing you can do relatively
freely here, free of the fear of very much direct state repression. So there
are things you can learn everywhere: you can learn things from Nicaragua,
you can learn things from Vietnam, you can learn things from Western
Europe, and you can learn things from Canada. But if you want to go
somewhere for salvation, you're not going to find it.
Dispelling Illusions
WOMAN: Noam, in general, how would you say ordinary people should
go about trying to dispel their illusions about the world-what's the best way
to start?
Well, you don't sit in your room somewhere and dispel illusions-very
few people are capable of doing that. I mean, some people are capable of
doing it, but most aren't. Usually you find out what you think by interaction
with people, otherwise you don't know what you think-you just hear
something, and maybe you accept it, or you don't pay any attention to it, or
something like that. You learn about things because you're interested in the
topic, and when it's the social world, your interest in it often involves ought
to involve, at least-trying to change it, it's in that context that you learn.
And you learn by trying out ideas, and hearing reactions to them, and
hearing what other people have to say about the topic, and formulating
programs, and trying to pursue them, and seeing where they break down,
and getting some experience, and so on and so forth.
So dispelling the illusions is just a part of organizing and acting. It's not
something that you do in a seminar, or in your living room-not that you
can't do it there, but it's just a different kind of activity. Like, if you have
some illusions about classical Greece, let's say, then you can probably do it
in the library, to some extent at least. But if you're trying to dispel illusions
about a live, ongoing social process that's changing all the time, and that
you only get to see little pieces of-that's really not the way to do it. You do
it through interactions with other people, and by functioning in some kind
of community of concern, and of commitment, and of activism.
MAN: If I were to hold a meeting in my community and invite someone to
speak about the kinds of things we've been discussing this weekend, though,
I'd probably get a very small turnout.

Chapter Three

105

And also, don't forget, a lot of the destruction that you see in the world
happens because people are constantly organizing, and advancing, and
progressing, and taking things over, and struggling against their oppression.
I mean, the fact that all of these atrocities have been going on in Central
America in the 1980s is a sign of progress, you know. Up until around the
late 1970s, nobody here even commented on Central America. Why?
Because it was all under control, it was pure atrocities, nobody was fighting
back-so therefore no one here even paid attention to it. It only became an
issue in the 1980s because there was a great deal of very successful organizing there: they did overthrow the Somoza regime in Nicaragua, there were
huge peasant unions being formed for the first time in El Salvador and Guatemala, there was just a lot of extremely effective organizing taking place.
So then the death squads came, and the U.S. trainers came, and people like
you and me had to pay our taxes to have those people murdered. But they
still have not yet eradicated it. Despite all the terror in Guatemala-you could
even call it something like genocide-the working-class unions are
reconstituting, they're still there. And crucially, in the 1980s that activism
induced a solidarity movement in the United States which has interacted
very constructively with the people there: that's an extremely important
change, a dramatic change. So when we talk about what governments are up
to, of course everything looks bleak. But look around-there are all kinds of
other things happening, and that's what you do.

4

Colloquy
Based primarily on discussions at Fort Collins,
Colorado, April 1 0, 1990.

The Totalitarian Strain
MAN: There's been a plethora of books recently by dissidents critiquing the
media-yours and Ed Herman's, and Ben Bagdikian's, Michael Parenti's,
Mark Hertsgaard's-but as I heard Alexander Cockburn say a couple days
ago, "It's still one nation under Time/Warner": there's all of this literature
that's available, but there really hasn't been much of a dent in the
structure.!
Where would there be a dent? Suppose you had a thousand books: would
that change the fact that Time and Warner Communications can form a
conglomerate? All of this literature is not tied up with any form--any form, I
mean, not five people-of social organization that is trying to undermine the
corporate structure of the media. This work all is just an effort to educate
people so they're better able to protect themselves from the propaganda
system. And there I think there has been an effect: a lot of people are
attuned to propaganda in a way they weren't before. But none of this can be
conceived of as an attempt to change the corporate structure directly-there
isn't even a proposal about that in anyone of these books. Take Ben
Bagdikian's book, or the first chapter of Ed's and my book: they don't
suggest how we might change corporate capitalism, that's a completely
different topic. They just say, as long as you have corporate capitalism,
here's what the media are going to look like.
WOMAN: Are you going to do an article on what happened in Central
America recently-the Nicaraguan elections [of 1990, in which the Sandinista Party lost to the U.S.-supported candidate, Violeta Chamorro]?
I am-not on the elections themselves, on the U.S. reaction to the elections.2 Nicaragua's for them to write about, I write about the United States.
106

Chapter Four

107

But the reaction of the media here was pretty astonishing. The most remarkable feature was the unanimity. I mean, there was an absolutely unanimous reaction across the entire mainstream spectrum, from Anthony Lewis
and Mary McGrory over to George Will and whatever other right-wing lunatic there is. In fact, about the only difference between the so-called
"liberals" and "conservatives" was that the liberals pointed to the fact that
the Nicaraguan people essentially voted with a gun to their heads and then
said, "The election was free and fair, uncoerced, a miracle of democracy,"
whereas the conservatives didn't bother saying the people voted with a gun
to their heads, they just said it was a miracle of democracy. 3
Some of it was comical. For instance, the New York Times had a column
by David Shipler, a liberal journalist, which said, yeah, the embargo's
killing them, the contras are killing them, they know we're going to
continue the embargo unless they vote for our candidate. Headline:
"Victory For U.S. Fair Play." 4 The Boston Globe, which is a very liberal
newspaper-it's the outer limit in the mainstream-had a headline: "Rallying
to Chamorro." The theme was, okay, now all the people who love
Nicaraguans, like we've all done all these years, must rally to Chamorro.5
Well, say it was 1964, after Goldwater lost the Presidential race here two to
one--can you imagine anybody saying, "Okay, now every Goldwater voter
must 'rally to Johnson' "? That's straight out of Stalinist Russia. You don't
"rally to the leader" in a democracy-you do whatever you feel like doing.
But the idea that you've got to rally behind der Fuhrer is quite acceptable in
the American liberal
press.
.
In fact, it's interesting that the media themselves even recognized the
unanimity. So for example, the New York Times had an article by Elaine
.
Sciolino surveying the U.S. reaction, and the headline was, "Americans
United in Joy, But Divided Over Policy."6 And the division over policy
turns out to be the question: who gets credit for having achieved this magnificent result? See, that's where you get a liberal/conservative split: "did
I
the contras help or hurt?" Is it better to do it the way it's done in El Salvador--leave women hanging from trees with their skin flayed off and
bleeding to death, leave thousands of corpses beheaded by the roadside so
that everybody else will get the point-or should you do what Senator Alan
Cranston suggested in 1986, to pick a dove: let them "fester in their own
juices," through economic strangulation and other means?7 Well, the fact
is, the right wing wins on that one: the contras obviously helped. But the
idea that everyone was "United in Joy" over the result, that was considered
perfectly legitimate. In other words, we're straight totalitarians: everyone is
united, we all march on command, there isn't one word of dissidence tolerated. Phrases like "United in Joy" are the kinds of things you might see in
the North Korean press, maybe. But it's interesting, American elites pride
themselves on being dedicated totalitarians, they think that's the way we
ought to be--we ought to be the worst totalitarian culture in the world, in which
everyone agrees.

108

Understanding Power

Look, anyone can see, a ten-year-old could see, that an election carried
out under conditions where a monstrous superpower is saying, "Vote for
our candidate or starve to death," is obviously not free. I mean, if some
unimaginable superpower were to threaten us, saying, "We're going to reduce you to the level of Ethiopia unless you vote for our candidate," and
then people here voted for their candidate, you'd have to be some kind of
crazy Nazi or something to say that it was a free election. But in the United
States, everyone says it-we're all "United in Joy." That's an interesting fact
about the United States, actually-what it shows is how deeply totalitarian
the culture really is. In fact, it would be very hard to mimic this even in a
well-run totalitarian state, but here it passes without anybody even noticing
it, because it's all so deeply ingrained. In any country that had even a memory of what democracy means, if you saw that everyone was "United in
Joy," the article would say, "There's something really wrong with this
country." Nobody can be "United in Joy" over anything. Pick the topic, it
just can't be that people are "United in Joy" about it-unless it's Albania,
then yeah, sure, you've got the guns pointed at you, you're "United in Joy."
But in the United States, nobody even sees that there's anything odd about
it.
WOMAN: There was a breakthrough, though-the Wall Street Journal on its
front page ran an article written by a man from The Nation [a left-leaning
magazine] saying that we ought to be ashamed of what happened in
Nicaragua.
That wasn't on the front page, that was on the Op-Ed page-and that was
Alex Cockburn, who's the Wall Street Journal's once-a-month gesture to
"some other voice." Sure, I mean, when I say the unity was a hundred
percent, I know of precisely two exceptions in the mainstream press in the
United States. Obviously I haven't read everything in the mainstream press,
but I've looked at quite a lot, and I've been in touch with people all around
the country who've been looking, and I found only two exceptions: one was
Alex Cockburn in the Wall Street Journal, and the other was an editor I
know at the Boston Globe, Randolph Ryan, who managed to put something
about this in an editorial. 8 So the two of them were able to say what any
eight-year-old would see right off-and as far as I know, that's it for the
American press.
As a matter of fact, it was the same in the coverage before the elections.
I, and probably you, and a lot of other people were following the media
very closely just to see if there would be one phrase, just a phrase,
anywhere in the mainstream media, that said that a Sandinista Party victory
might be the best thing for Nicaragua-I haven't found a phrase. I mean,
even journalists who believe it couldn't say it. Now, obviously the issue is
contentious-it was contentious in Nicaragua-but here it's not, here you have
to have 100 percent unanimity.

Chapter Four

109

Furthermore, it was also assumed automatically, across the board, that
Chamorro was the democratic candidate-and nobody ever gave you a
reason why she was the democratic candidate. I mean, what are her democratic credentials? That's not anything you even have to argue in the United
States: Washington says she's the democratic candidate, and American
business says she's the democratic candidate, so that settles it-for American
intellectuals, there are no further questions to ask. And the interesting thing
is, again, nobody even sees that there's anything odd about this. Like,
nobody writes an Op-Ed saying, "Isn't it strange? Just because Washington
and the business community tell us she's the democratic candidate, does
that mean that we have to repeat it and not look for some reason, find out
what her democratic credentials are?" It wouldn't occur to anybody: the intellectual community in the United States is so disciplined they simply
don't ask those questions.
A Lithuania Hypothetical
MAN: Dr. Chomsky, I just want to ask a question on this topic: Daniel Ortega [Nicaraguan President, Sandinista Party] was in power for how long,
a decade?
Yes.
MAN: And yet he lost the election.
Why "And yet"?
MAN: Well, he had control of that country for ten years.
What does it mean, "He had control of it"?
MAN: He controlled the press.
He did not. In fact, Nicaragua is the only country I know of in history
that allowed a major opposition press [La Prensa] to operate while it was
being attacked-a press which was calling for the overthrow of the government by violence, which was identifying with the foreign-run mercenary
army attacking the country, and which was funded, partly openly and partly
covertly (though everybody knew), by the foreign power attacking the
country [i.e. the U.S.]. That's never happened before in history-the United
States would never tolerate anything like that for one second. Furthermore,
and quite apart from that, large parts of Nicaragua were flooded, and in fact
dominated, by U.S. propaganda. Remember, there are large areas of
Nicaragua where what people know is what they hear over the

110

Understanding Power

radio, and the United States ran major radio and television stations in Honduras and Costa Rica which dominated the information flow in large sectors of the Nicaraguan countryside.9
In fact, the level of freedom of the press in Nicaragua in the last ten
years just broke new libertarian standards: there's never been anything even
remotely comparable to it in history. Try to find a case.
MAN: But given ten years in power, it seemed rather remarkable that Ortega wasn't able to hold on to that mandate.
Really? Well let me ask you how remarkable it is. Suppose the Soviet
Union were to play the game the way we do. Lithuania just declared independence, right [in March 1990]? Let's suppose that the Soviet Union were
capable of doing what we did in Nicaragua. So: it would organize a terrorist army to attack Lithuania; it would train it to attack "soft targets," civilian targets; it would try to kill large numbers of health workers, teachers,
farmers, and so on.IO Meanwhile, it would impose an embargo-suppose it
were able to do this-and block trade, block export and import, it would
pressure international institutions to stop providing any assistance. 11 Of
course, to make the analogy accurate, we'd have to assume that Lithuania
begins at a level much lower than what it actually is.
Okay, now suppose that after ten years of this, Lithuania has been reduced to the level of Ethiopia, alright? And suppose that then there's an
election, and Moscow says: "Look, we're going to continue this, all of it,
unless you vote for the Communist Party." And now suppose that the
Lithuanians do vote for the Communist Party. Would you find that remarkable?
MAN: I don't think Nicaragua was reduced to the level of Ethiopia.
Oh yeah, they were. They were reduced to the level of-well, maybe
Haiti.12 But just answer my question: would you find that remarkable?
MAN: Under those circumstances, I guess I wouldn't.
Okay, but then why do you find it remarkable when it happened in
Nicaragua?
MAN: Well, I don't have access to all the facts you do.
You have every fact I told you-every fact I told you, you knew. Every
fact I told you you can find on the front pages of the New York Times. It's
just that when you hear the White House announce, "We're going to continue with the embargo unless Chamorro wins," you have to be able to
think enough so you conclude, well, these people are voting with a gun to

Chapter Four
111
their heads.13 If you can't think that far, it doesn't matter what the newspapers say. And
the beauty of a really well-indoctrinated intellectual class is they can't think that far.
They can think that far easily in the case of Lithuania, but they can't think that far in
the case of the United States, even though the actual situation is the hypothetical one
that I described. So often the information is there, in a sense-it's just that it's not there,
because people are so indoctrinated that they simply don't see it.
Perpetuating Brainwashing Under Freedom
MAN: Why is it that across the board in the media you can't find examples
of people using their brains?
You can find them, but typically they're not in the mainstream press.
MAN: Why is that?
Because if they have the capacity to think freely and understand these types of
things, they're going to be kept out by a very complicated filtering system-which
actually starts in kindergarten, I think. In fact, the whole educational and professional
training system is a very elaborate filter, which just weeds out people who are too
independent, and who think for themselves, and who don't know how to be
submissive, and so on-because they're dysfunctional to the institutions. I mean, it
would be highly dysfunctional to have people in the media who could ask questions
like this. So by the time you've made it to Bureau Chief or Editor, or you've become a
bigshot at C.B.S. or something, the chances are that you've just got all this stuff in your
bones-you've internalized values that make it clear to you that there are certain things
you just don't say,and in fact, you don't even think about them anymore.
This was actually discussed years ago in an interesting essay by George Orwell,
which happens to be the introduction to Animal Farm. Animal Farm is a satire on
Soviet totalitarianism, obviously, and it's a very famous book, everybody reads it. But
what people don't usually read is its introduction, which talks about censorship in
England-and the main reason people don't read it is because it was censored, nicely; it
simply wasn't published with the book. It was finally rediscovered about thirty years
later and somebody somewhere published it, and now it's available in some modern
editions. But in this essay Orwell said, look, this book is obviously about Stalinist
Russia, however it's not all that different in England. And then he described how
things work in England. He said: in England there isn't any commissar around who
beats you over the head if you say the wrong thing, but nevertheless the results are not
all that different. And then he had a two-line description of how the press works in
England, which is pretty accu-

112

Understanding Power

rate, in fact. One of the reasons why the results are similar, he said, is because the press is owned by wealthy men who have strong interests in not
having certain things said. The other, which he said is equally pertinent, is
that if you're a well-educated person in England-you went to the right prep
schools, then to Oxford, and now you're a bigshot somewhere-you have
simply learned that there are certain things that it is not proper to say.14
And that's a large part of education, in fact: just internalizing the understanding that there are certain things it is not proper to say, and it is not
proper to think. And if you don't learn that, typically you'll be weeded out
of the institutions somewhere along the line. Well, those two factors are
very important ones, and there are others, but they go a long way towards
explaining the uniformity of ideology in the intellectual culture here.15
Now, of course, it's not a hundred percent-so you'll get a few people filtering through who will do things differently. Like I say, in this "United in
Joy" business, I was able to find two people in the United States who were
not "United in Joy," and were able to say so in the mainstream press. But if
the system is really working well, it's not going to do things which undermine itself. In fact, it's a bit like asking, "How come Pravda under Stalin
didn't have journalists denouncing the Gulags [Soviet penal labor camps]?"
Why not? Well, it would have been dysfunctional to the system. I suspect
it's not that the journalists in Pravda were lying-I mean, that was a different
system, they used the threat of force to silence dissidents, which we don't
use much here. But even in the Soviet Union, chances are very strong that
if you actually bothered to look, you'd find that most of the journalists
actually believed the things they wrote. And that's because people who
didn't believe that kind of thing would never have made it onto Pravda in
the first place. It's very hard to live with cognitive dissonance: only a real
cynic can believe one thing and say another. So whether it's a totalitarian
system or a free system, the people who are most useful to the system of
power are the ones who actually believe what they say, and they're the ones
who will typically make it through.
So take Tom Wicker at the New York Times: when you talk to him about
this kind of stuff, he gets very irate and says, "Nobody tells me what to
write." And that's perfectly true, nobody tells him what to write-but if he
didn't already know what to write, he wouldn't be a columnist for the New
York Times. Like, nobody tells Alex Cockburn what to write, and therefore
he's not a columnist for the New York Times, because he thinks different
things. You think the wrong thoughts, you're not in the system.
Now, it's interesting that the Wall Street Journal allows this one
opening, Alex Cockburn. I mean, the opening is so minuscule that it's not
even worth discussing-but it so happens that once a month, there is one
mainstream journal in the United States which allows a real dissident to
write a free and open column. So that means, like, .0001 percent of the
coverage is free and independent. And it's in the Wall Street Journal, which
doesn't care: for

Chapter Four

113

their audience the New York Times is Communist, so here's a guy who's
even more Communist.
And the result of all of this is that it's a very effective system of ideological control-much more effective than Soviet totalitarianism ever was. In
fact, if you look at the entire range of media in the Soviet Union that people
were actually exposed to, they had much more dissidence in the 1980s than
we do, overtly, and people were in fact reading a much broader range of
press, listening to foreign broadcasts, and so on-which is pretty much unheard of in the U.S.16 Or just to give one other example, during the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan, there was even a newscaster [Vladimir Danchev]
who made broadcasts over Moscow radio for five successive nights back in
1983, denouncing the Russian invasion of Afghanistan-he actually called it
an "invasion"-and calling on the Afghans to resist, before he was finally
taken off the air.17 That's unimaginable in the United States. I mean, can
you imagine Dan Rather or anybody else getting on the radio and denouncing the U.S. "invasion" of South Vietnam, and calling on the Vietnamese to
resist? That's inconceivable. The United States couldn't have that amount of
intellectual freedom.
MAN: Well, I don't know if that's "intellectual freedom," for a journalist to
say that.
Sure it is. It's intellectual freedom when a journalist can understand that
2 + 2 = 4; that's what Orwell was writing about in 1984. Everybody here
applauds that book, but nobody is willing to think about what it means.
What Winston Smith [the main character] was saying is, if we can still understand that 2 + 2 = 4, they haven't taken everything away. Okay? Well, in
the United States, people can't even understand that 2 + 2 = 4.
MAN: Couldn't an editorialist say it, though, even if a reporter can't?
Have any of them done it, in thirty years?
MAN: I don't know.
Well, I'll tell you, nobody has; I've checked, actually.18
WOMAN: You make it sound so uniform, though-like there's only one or
two people in the entire U.S. media who aren't dishonest or blindly serving
power.
Well, that's really not my point: obviously in any complex institution,
there are going to be a fair number of people who want to do their work
with integrity, and are good at it, and don't just end up serving power-these
systems aren't totally monolithic, after all. A lot of people go into
journalism

114

Understanding Power

with a real commitment to professional integrity-they like the field, and
they want to do it honestly. And some of them continue to do an admirable
job of it-in fact, some of them even manage to do it at journals like the New
York Times.
In fact, to a large degree I think you can tell when the New York Times's
editors want a story covered accurately just by looking at who they send to
the place. For instance, when they send John Kifner, that means they want
the story told-because he's an honest journalist, and he's going to tell the
story. I mean, I don't know him personally, but you can just tell from his
work that he's a journalist of real integrity, and he's going to dig, he's going
to find out the truth, and he's going to write about it-and the editors must
know that. So I don't know anything about how they assign stories at the
Times, but I'm willing to make a bet that when there's a story the Times's
editors want told, they'll send Kifner, and when his job is done they'll probably send him back to the "Metro" desk or something.
On the other hand, most of the people at the Times who make it to be
correspondent or editor or whatever tend to be either very obedient or very
cynical. The obedient ones have adapted-they've internalized the values and
believe what they're saying, otherwise they probably wouldn't have made it
that far. But there are also some plain cynics. James LeMoyne at the Times
is a perfect example: James LeMoyne is an absolute crook, he's one of the
most dishonest journalists I've ever seen. The dishonesty of his reporting is
so extreme, in fact, that it can't just be indoctrination in his case. Actually,
LeMoyne's tenure as a correspondent in Central America ended up with an
exposure so bad that even the Times had to publish an admission about it.
Did you follow that?
In 1988 LeMoyne had written a story which talked about two people in
El Salvador who he claimed were tortured by left-wing guerrillas trying to
undermine the elections; it was one part of a whole effort in the American
press at the time to maintain support for the U.S. client regime in El Salvador despite its atrocities.19 Well, a freelance journalist in Central America, Chris Norton, saw LeMoyne's article and was surprised by it, because
the atrocities LeMoyne described were supposed to have taken place in an
area of the country reporters couldn't get to, because it was under military
occupation. Norton wanted to figure out just how LeMoyne knew about
these people being tortured, so he went up as close to that region as he
could, and he talked to the mayor, and to the priest, and to people in the
community-and he discovered that one of the alleged victims didn't exist,
and the other was perfectly fine. He then went back to San Salvador and did
some more checking-and he discovered that LeMoyne had simply taken the
story straight from a San Salvadoran newspaper, where it had been attributed to an army officer. It was in fact just straight army disinformation
of a standard sort, which LeMoyne then reported in the New York Times as
if he knew something about it. Then the State Department picked it up from
the New York Times and distributed it to Congress to show that the Salvadoran guerrillas were undermining the election.

Chapter Four

115

Well, Norton uncovered this, then another freelance journalist, Mark
Cooper, picked up Norton's story and published something about it in the
L.A. Weekly, an alternative weekly in Los Angeles. The piece then
appeared in the Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting journal, Extra!F.A.I.R. is a very good media analysis group in New York. Still no
reaction from the Times. Finally, Alex Cockburn got ahold of it, and
mentioned it in his column in The Nation.2o Well, by that time word was
sort of getting around about this, so the Times figured they had to react, and
they published a correction-I think it's the longest correction they've ever
published, it's several paragraphs long. It said, our usual high standards
were not met in this case, one thing or another like that.21
Well, that's kind of an extreme example-but it's by no means the only
case like that. In fact, just let me mention one other one, which was even
more important-here LeMoyne really plied his trade.
Journalism LeMoyne-Style:
A Sample of the Cynical Aspect
As you know, for years it was necessary for the U.S. government to
maintain the pretense that the contras in Nicaragua were a guerrilla force,
not a U.S. proxy army. Now, it's perfectly obvious that they were not a
guerrilla force-there are no guerrillas in history that have had anything
remotely like the degree of support we gave the contras: there are no
guerrillas in history that had three supply flights a day bringing them food
and supplies and weapons, and who complained that they didn't have
enough airplanes, and that they needed more helicopters. I mean, the whole
thing was completely ridiculous: these guys had armaments that some units
of the American army didn't have, they had computer centers, they had
communications equipment. And they needed all of that, because
Nicaragua was under constant surveillance by high-performance American
reconnaissance aircraft to determine where Sandinista troops were being
deployed, and the contras had to have some way of receiving that
information.22
But the point is, it was necessary for the propaganda system to pretend
that the contras were like the F.M.L.N. in El Salvador-just a regular indigenous guerrilla force opposing the government. And part of the method
for claiming that these two forces were equivalent was to say that the
F.M.L.N. guerrillas also had outside support from a foreign government--in
other words, from the government of Nicaragua-and that was the only
reason they could survive. Well, it's conceivable that the F.M.L.N. was getting outside support, but if so, it would have been some kind of a miracle--because it was undetectable. I mean, it's not that the United States is a
primitive, stone-age society: there are technological means around to discover evidence of such things, but they never were able to detect any support coming from Nicaragua at all.
According to the State Department propaganda, the main arms flow

116

Understanding Power

from Nicaragua to the F.M.L.N. was across the Gulf of Fonseca.23 Well,
David MacMichael, who was the C.I.A. analyst in charge of analyzing this
material in the early 1980s and then quit the Agency, testified at the World
Court and pointed out what this meant. He described the situation: the Gulf
of Fonseca is thirty kilometers wide; it's completely patrolled by the u.s.
Navy; there's an island in the middle of it which had a super-sophisticated
U.S. radar system that could pick up boats up and down the Pacific Coast;
there were U.S. Navy S.E.A.L. teams running all around the place-yet they
never even picked up a canoe. So if Nicaragua were sending arms across
the Gulf of Fonseca, they had to have had some super-sophisticated
methods.24 I mean, the Nicaraguans had no problem whatsoever detecting
the U.S. arms flow to the contras-they told reporters exactly where it was
coming from; it was unreported in the United States, because the reporters
chose not to report it, but the Nicaraguans had no problem detecting it.25
Anyway, that was the propaganda line that had to be maintained in the
American press, that was the official story. Now we come back to James
LeMoyne.
The United States government opposed the Central American peace accords that were signed in 1987 [Esquipulas II, the so-called "Arias plan"],
so it was therefore necessary to demolish them. And one of the ways of demolishing them was to increase aid to the contras. The press committed itself with great passion to helping this effort along; LeMoyne was right up
front. Right after the accords were signed, LeMoyne published an article in
which he wrote: there is "ample evidence" that the Salvadoran guerrillas are
being supplied with arms by Nicaragua in violation of the peace accords,
and without that support the guerrillas couldn't survive.26 Alright, that had
always been the necessary story, but just then it was especially important to
drive it home-because right then the United States was tripling its supply
flights to the contras in response to the accords, and of course in violation
of the accords.27 So the press wouldn't report that we were escalating our
support for the contras, but they kept reporting that the Nicaraguans were
illegally arming the F.M.L.N. in El Salvador-and now James LeMoyne says
that there is "ample evidence" of it.
Well, when that story appeared, F.A.I.R. wrote a letter to the New York
Times, asking them to please have James LeMoyne enlighten their readers
about the "ample evidence" of this arms flow to the F.M.L.N.-since the
World Court couldn't find it, and no independent investigator's been able to
find it, and the guys who worked on it in the C.I.A. didn't know about it:
could they please do that? Well, the Times didn't publish their letter, but
F.A.I.R. did get a personal response back from the Foreign Editor, Joseph
Lelyveld, who said, yes, maybe LeMoyne's report was a bit imprecise this
time, it didn't meet his usual high standards, and so on.28
Then followed a period in which the Times had plenty of time to correct
the "imprecision"-but instead article after article appeared by LeMoyne,
George Volsky, Steven Engelberg and others, repeating exactly the same

Chapter Four

117

falsehood: that there was ample evidence of an arms flow from Nicaragua.
29
But F.A.I.R. just kept after them, and finally they got another letter back
from Lelyveld, the Foreign Editor-this was around March now, their first
letter was in August. Lelyveld said he had recently assigned LeMoyne to
do a major story on the arms flow to the F.M.L.N., to really nail the thing
down once and for all, and that they should wait for that story. Okay, they
waited. Nothing happened. Six months later, they figured nothing was
going to happen, so they published this interchange of letters with Lelyveld
in the F.A.I.R. newsletter, and said: we don't see the story, what's going on?
30

Two months after that, a story did finally appear in the Times-I think it
was LeMoyne's last story before he left the Times, or whatever he did, took
a leave or something. This is now fifteen months after his original story
about the "ample evidence," nine months after he was assigned to do the
follow-up. And if you take a look at the article the Times finally published,
you'll discover that the "ample evidence" had turned into no evidence.
LeMoyne said: well, there really is no direct evidence of any supply of
arms from Nicaragua; some people say this, some people say that, but
there's nothing concrete, there's nothing to point to. So that's the end of the
story: it turns out the "ample evidence" is no evidence.31
Now, that's no joke-this is fabrication in the service of the state that has
led to tens of thousands of people being killed, because maintaining this
pretense over the years has been one of the ways in which the U.S. government has supported the terror in El Salvador and extended the war against
Nicaragua. It's not a small point. This is serious lying, very serious. And it's
just one of thousands of cases demonstrating that the media in the United
States serve the interests of state-corporate power, they are organs of propaganda, as in fact one would expect them to be.32
Rethinking Watergate
MAN: But how do you explain Watergate, then? Those reporters weren't
very sympathetic to power-they toppled a President.
And just ask yourself why he was toppled-he was toppled because he
had made a very bad mistake: he had antagonized people with power.
See, one of the serious illusions we live under in the United States,
which is a major part of the whole system of indoctrination, is the idea that
the government is the power-and the government's not the power, the government is one segment of power. Real power is in the hands of the people
who own the society; the state-managers are usually just servants. And
Watergate is actually a perfect illustration of the point-because right at the
time of Watergate, history actually ran a controlled experiment for us. The
Watergate exposures, it turns out, came at exactly the same time as the
COINTELPRO exposures-I don't know if you know what I mean.

118

Understanding Power

MAN: COINTELPRO?
See, you probably don't-but that already makes my point, because the
COINTELPRO exposures were a thousand times more significant than
Watergate. Remember what Watergate was, after all: Watergate was a matter of a bunch of guys from the Republican National Committee breaking
into a Democratic Party office for essentially unknown reasons and doing
no damage. Okay, that's petty burglary, it's not a big deal. Well, at the exact
same time that Watergate was discovered, there were exposures in the
courts and through the Freedom of Information Act of massive F.B.I. operations to undermine political freedom in the United States, running through
every administration back to Roosevelt, but really picking up under Kennedy. It was called "COINTELPRO" [short for "Counterintelligence Program"], and it included a vast range of things.
It included the straight Gestapo-style assassination of a Black Panther
leader; it included organizing race riots in an effort to destroy the black
movements; it included attacks on the American Indian Movement, on the
women's movement, you name it. It included fifteen years of F.B.I. disruption of the Socialist Workers Party-that meant regular F.B.I. burglaries,
stealing membership lists and using them to threaten people, going to businesses and getting members fired from their jobs, and so on.33 Well, that
fact alone-the fact that for fifteen years the F.B.I. had been burglarizing and
trying to undermine a legal political party-is already vastly more important
than the fact that a bunch of Keystone Kops broke into the Democratic
National Committee headquarters one time. The Socialist Workers Party is
a legal political party, after all-the fact that they're a weak political party
doesn't mean they have less rights than the Democrats. And this wasn't a
bunch of gangsters, this was the national political police: that's very
serious. And it didn't happen once in the Watergate office complex, it was
going on for fifteen years, under every administration. And keep in mind,
the Socialist Workers Party episode is just some tiny footnote to
COINTELPRO. In comparison to this, Watergate is a tea party.
Well, look at the comparison in treatment-I mean, you're aware of the
comparison in treatment, that's why you know about Watergate and you
don't know about COINTELPRO. So what does that tell you? What it tells
you is, people in power will defend themselves. The Democratic Party represents about half of corporate power, and those people are able to defend
themselves; the Socialist Workers Party represents no power, the Black
Panthers don't represent any power, the American Indian Movement doesn't
represent any power-so you can do anything you want to them.
Or take a look at the Nixon administration's famous "Enemies List,"
which came out in the course of Watergate [exposed in 1973, the document
named 208 Americans from various professions under the title "Opponents
list and political enemies project"]. You've heard of that, but did you hear
about the assassination of Fred Hampton? No. Nothing ever happened to
any of the people who were on the Enemies List, which I know perfectly

Chapter Four

119

well, because I was on it-and it wasn't because I was on it that it made the
front pages. But the F.B.I. and the Chicago police assassinated a Black
Panther leader as he lay in his bed one night during the Nixon
administration [on December 4, 1969]. Well, if the press had any integrity
at all, if the Washington Post had any integrity, what they would have said
is, "Watergate is totally insignificant and innocuous, who cares about any
of that in comparison with these other things." But that's not what
happened, obviously. And that just shows again, very dramatically, how the
press is lined up with power.
The real lesson of Nixon's fall is that the President shouldn't call Thomas
Watson [Chairman of I.B.M.] and McGeorge Bundy [former Democratic
official] bad names-that means the Republic's collapsing. And the press
prides itself on having exposed this fact. On the other hand, if you want to
send the F.B.I. to organize the assassination of a Black Panther leader,
that's fine by us; it's fine by the Washington Post too.
Incidentally, I think there is another reason why a lot of powerful people
were out to get Nixon at that time-and it had to do with something a lot
more profound than the Enemies List and the Watergate burglary. I suspect
it had to do with the events of the summer of 1971, when the Nixon administration basically broke up the international economic arrangement that
had existed for the previous twenty-five years [i.e. the so-called "Bretton
Woods" system, established in 1944 at the United Nations Monetary and
Financial Conference at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire]. See, by 1971 the
Vietnam War had already badly weakened the United States economically
relative to its industrial rivals, and one of the ways the Nixon administration reacted to that was by simply tearing apart the Bretton Woods
system, which had been set up to organize the world economy after World
War II. The Bretton Woods system had made the United States the world's
banker, basically-it had established the U.S. dollar as a global reserve currency fixed to gold, and it imposed conditions about no import quotas, and
so on. And Nixon just tore the whole thing to shreds: he went off the gold
standard, he stopped the convertibility of the dollar, he raised import duties.
No other country would have had the power to do that, but Nixon did it,
and that made him a lot of powerful enemies-because multinational
corporations and international banks relied on that system, and they did not
like it being broken down. So if you look back, you'll find that Nixon was
being attacked in places like the Wall Street Journal at the time, and I
suspect that from that point on there were plenty of powerful people out to
get him. Watergate just offered an opportunity.
In fact, in this respect I think Nixon was treated extremely unfairly. I
mean, there were real crimes of the Nixon administration, and he should
have been tried-but not for any of the Watergate business. Take the bombing of Cambodia, for instance: the bombing of Cambodia was infinitely
worse than anything that came up in the Watergate hearings-this thing they
call the "secret bombing" of Cambodia, which was "secret" because the
press didn't talk about what they knew.34 The U.S. killed maybe a cou-

120

Understanding Power

pIe hundred thousand people in Cambodia, they devastated a peasant society.35 The bombing of Cambodia did not even appear in Nixon's Articles
of Impeachment. It was raised in the Senate hearings, but only in one
interesting respect-the question that was raised was, why hadn't Nixon
informed Congress? It wasn't, why did you carry out one of the most
intense bombings in history in densely populated areas of a peasant
country, killing maybe 150,000 people? That never came up. The only
question was, why didn't you tell Congress? In other words, were people
with power granted their prerogatives? And once again, notice that what it
means is, infringing on the rights of powerful people is unacceptable:
"We're powerful, so you've got to tell us-then we'll tell you, 'Fine, go bomb
Cambodia.' " In fact, that whole thing was a gag-because there was no
reason for Congress not to have known about the bombing, just as there
was no reason for the media not to have known: it was completely public.
So in terms of all the horrifying atrocities the Nixon government carried
out, Watergate isn't even worth laughing about. It was a triviality. Watergate is a very clear example of what happens to servants when they forget
their role and go after the people who own the place: they are very quickly
put back into their box, and somebody else takes over. You couldn't ask for
a better illustration of it than that-and it's even more dramatic because this
is the great exposure that's supposed to demonstrate what a free and critical
press we have. What Watergate really shows is what a submissive and
obedient press we have, as the comparisons to COINTELPRO and
Cambodia illustrate very clearly.
Escaping Indoctrination
'MAN: But do you think things are ever going to change? Aren't we always
going to have people entrenched in power, left or right, who want to preserve that power, and will use all of the means at their disposal to do it-and all we can really do is just sit back and complain about it?
That's the attitude .of people who thought that there was nothing you could
do about feudalism and slavery. And there was something you could do
about feudalism and slavery, but not by sitting and complaining about it.
John Brown didn't sit and complain about it.
MAN: He didn't get very far.
He did. They overthrew slavery, and the Abolitionists played a big role
in that.
[Brown's 1859 attempt to set off a slave revolt by seizing a federal armory in Harpers Ferry, Virginia, electrified the country and intensified the
Abolitionist movement.]

Chapter Four

121

MAN: So as long as we criticize, try to offer constructive criticism, there's
hope of changing the system?
If the constructive criticism leads to the point where mass popular movements form that do something to change the system, sure, then there's hope.
I mean, there wouldn't have been an American Revolution if people had
been writing pamphlets but not doing anything more than that.
WOMAN: Then what's the trick to holding on and not giving up-because it
seems like a lot of people need it.
The trick is not to be isolated-if you're isolated, like Winston Smith in
1984, then sooner or later you're going to break, as he finally broke. That
was the point of Orwell's story. In fact, the whole tradition of popular control has been exactly that: to keep people isolated, because if you can keep
them isolated enough, you can get them to believe anything. But when people get together, all sorts of things are possible.
MAN: It just seems so hopeless, though, because you make it sound like the
entire press organization is locking dissidents out.
That's largely true-but like I say, there's a lot of flexibility possible. I
mean, it's true that the ideological barrier in the U.S. media is extreme-other countries have more openings for dissidence in the mainstream than
we do, even though their economic systems are basically the same. But still
there is quite a range of possibility for opening up the press here, even as it
now stands: it doesn't have to be .0001 percent open to dissident perspectives, it could be .1 percent or something. So I actually think there are
plenty of changes possible in the United States, even from within the institutions.
Remember that the media have two basic functions. One is to indoctrinate the elites, to make sure they have the right ideas and know how to
serve power. In fact, typically the elites are the most indoctrinated segment
of a society, because they are the ones who are exposed to the most propaganda and actually take part in the decision-making process. For them you
have the New York Times, and the Washington Post, and the Wall Street
Journal, and so on. But there's also a mass media, whose main function is
just to get rid of the rest of the population-to marginalize and eliminate
them, so they don't interfere with decision-making. And the press that's designed for that purpose isn't the New York Times and the Washington Post,
it's sitcoms on television, and the National Enquirer, and sex and violence,
and babies with three heads, and football, all that kind of stuff. But the approximately 85 percent of the population that is the main target of that
media, they don't have it in their genes that they're not interested in the way
the world works. And if they can escape from the effects of the de-educa-

Understanding Power
tion and indoctrination system, and the whole class system it's a part ofit's
after all not just indoctrination that keeps people from getting involved in
political life, by any means-if they can do that, then yeah, they're a big
audience for an alternative, and there's some hope.
In fact, there's a very interesting history about this in England. For a long
time in England, there was a mass, popular, daily labor press of quite good
newspapers, with a huge readership-a much bigger readership than all the
elite press in England combined, actually. It was the Daily Herald and the
News Chronicle and the Sunday Citizen. And this was not just Alex Cockburn once a month in the Wall Street Journal, but every day there were
newspapers giving a picture of the world and expressing a set of values radically different from those of the business community. And not only did
they have a big circulation, but their audience was also very much involved-for instance, there were surveys showing that people actually read
those newspapers much more than subscribers to things like the Guardian
and the London Times. But they disappeared in the 1960s, and they disappeared due to market pressures-it didn't have anything to do with the
number of readers they had, it had to do with the amount of capital they
could attract. Could you get advertisers, could you get capital for investment? In short, could you appeal to the business community, which happens to hold the real power? And over time, they couldn't.36
It's the same thing here: for instance, in the United States there isn't even
any such thing as a "labor reporter" anymore (except in the business press,
actually)-but there are plenty of "business reporters." And again, that
doesn't reflect people's interests: a lot more people are interested in the problems of workers than are interested in the bond market, if you count their
numbers-but if you multiply their numbers by their power in the society,
then yeah, it's true, the market for news about money and stocks is much
greater than the market for news about issues which matter to working
people.
But that's just the fact about an inegalitarian system: when you have a
serious disproportion of power, independent forces are likely to collapse-just because they can't get access to enough capital in the end. Like in
England, some media corporation didn't come along and try to offer this
huge mass audience another paper with a social-democratic line. Business
doesn't work that way-it's not trying to educate people to overthrow it, even
if you could make a profit off it. I mean, if you could convince Rupert
Murdoch that he can make a ton of money by publishing a newspaper
which has a social-democratic or even more radical line, something calling
for workers' management of corporations for instance, he wouldn't do it-because there are some things that are more important than profits, like
maintaining the entire system of power.
In fact, this is also pretty much the same reason why American elites
want military spending instead of social spending: if it turned out, as is
likely, that using taxpayers' money for socially useful purposes was even

Chapter Four

123

more profitable than sending it through the military system, that still
wouldn't change the decision to prefer military spending-because social
spending is going to interfere with the basic prerogatives of power, it's going to organize popular constituencies, and have all these other negative
side effects that you want to avoid.
WOMAN: So what you're saying is, even if there were a major cultural
change, with people at the grassroots level actually demanding a much
more open press, there still wouldn't be the capital to support that press?
No, people would have to take control of that capital. I mean, for one
thing, if there really were a mass of people demanding that kind of press,
they would have the capital-not at the level of big corporations, but like
unions, say. When unions are a mass organization, they can accumulate
strike funds, even though they can't compete with management and ownership in terms of total resources. But for another thing, there's no law of nature which says that control over capital has to be in a few hands-that's like
saying that political power has to be in a few hands. Why? There wasn't a
law that said that the king and the nobles had to run everything, and there
isn't a law that says that corporate owners and managers have to run everything either. These are social arrangements. They developed historically,
they can be changed historically.
Understanding the Middle East Conflict
MAN: If I can just change the topic a little, Professor-I'd like you to talk a
bit about the situation in the Middle East these days. People say the Palestinians are utilizing the media more than they ever have before to draw attention to Israeli repression [i.e. during the Palestinian uprising of the late
1980s}. I'm wondering whether you think that will have any effect on
Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territories on the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip in the future?
[Editors' Note: The following discussion of the Israeli/Palestinian conflict forms the foundation of Chomsky's analysis of the so-called "peace
process" that began in the early 1990s, which is discussed in chapters 5
and 8.}
Well, this business about the Palestinians "using the media" is mostly
racist garbage, in my view. The fact of the matter is that the Intifada is a
big, mass, popular revolution in reaction to the absolutely brutal treatment
the Palestinians have been living under-and it's going on in places where
there are no television cameras, and places where there are.
See, there's a whole racist line which is very common in the United

124

Understanding Power

States. One of my favorite versions of it appeared in the journal Commentary, in an article written by some professor in Canada. It said: the Palestinians are "people who breed, and bleed, and advertise their misery." 37
Straight Nazi propaganda. I mean, imagine if somebody said that about
Jews: "Jews are people who breed, and bleed, and advertise their misery."
But that's the kind of thing you hear-it's a particularly vulgar version of it,
but the line is: look, the Palestinians are just doing it for the cameras because they're trying to discredit the Jews.
They do exactly the same thing when there are no cameras.
The real point is, Israel is having a lot of trouble putting down this popular revolution. I mean, the repression of the Palestinians in the West Bank
is not qualitatively different right now from what it's been for the last
twenty years-it's just that it's escalated in scale since the Palestinians started
fighting back in the Intifada. So the brutality you see occasionally now on
television has in fact been going on for the last twenty years, and it's just
the nature of a military occupation: military occupations are harsh and
brutal, there is no other kind [Israel seized the West Bank, Gaza Strip, and
Golan Heights from Jordan, Egypt, and Syria during the Six Day War in
1967, and has controlled them ever since]. There's been home-destruction,
collective punishments, expulsion, plenty of humiliation, censorship-I
mean, you'd have to go back to the worst days of the American South to
know what it's been like for the Palestinians in the Occupied Territories.
They are not supposed to raise their heads-that's what they say in Israel,
"They're raising their heads, we've got to do something about it." And that's
the way the Palestinians have been living.38
Well, the United States has been quite happy supporting that-so long as
it worked. But in the last few years, it hasn't worked. See, people with
power understand exactly one thing: violence. If violence is effective,
everything's okay; but if violence loses its effectiveness, then they start
worrying and have to try something else. So right now you can see U.S.
planners reassessing their policies towards the Occupied Territories, just as
you can see the Israeli leadership reassessing them-because violence isn't
working as well anymore. In fact, the occupation's beginning to be rather
harmful for Israel. So it's entirely possible that there could be some tactical
changes coming with respect to how Israel goes about controlling the
Territories--but none of this has anything to do with "using the media."
WOMAN: What do you think a solution might be for resolving the conflict
in the region, then?
Well, outside of the United States, everybody would know the answer to
that question. I mean, for years there's been a very broad consensus in the
world over the basic framework of a solution in the Middle East, with the
exception of two countries: the United States and Israel.39 It's going to have
to be some variety of two-state settlement.

Chapter Four

125

Look, there are two groups claiming the right of national self-determination in the same territory; they both have a claim, they're competing claims. There are various ways in which such competing claims
could be reconciled-you could do it through a federation, one thing or another-but given the present state of conflict, it's just going to have to be
done through some form of two-state settlement.40 Now, you could talk
about the modalities-should it be a confederation, how do you deal with
economic integration, and so on-but the principle's quite clear: there has to
be some settlement that recognizes the right of self-determination of Jews
in something like the state of Israel, and the right of self-determination of
Palestinians in something like a Palestinian state. And everybody knows
where that Palestinian state would be-in the West Bank and Gaza Strip,
along roughly the borders that existed before the Six Day War in 1967. And
everybody knows who the representative of the Palestinians is: it's the
Palestine Liberation Organization [P.L.O.].
All of this has been obvious for years-why hasn't it happened? Well, of
course Israel's opposed to it. But the main reason it hasn't happened is because the United States has blocked it: the United States has been blocking
the peace process in the Middle East for the last twenty years-we're the
leaders of the rejectionist camp, not the Arabs or anybody else. See, the
United States supports a policy which Henry Kissinger called "stalemate";
that was his word for it back in 1970.41 At that time, there was kind of a
split in the American government as to whether we should join the broad
international consensus on a political settlement, or block a political settlement. And in that internal struggle, the hard-liners prevailed; Kissinger was
the main spokesman. The policy that won out was what he called "stalemate": keep things the way they are, maintain the system of Israeli oppression. And there was a good reason for that, it wasn't just out of the blue:
having an embattled, militaristic Israel is an important part of how we rule
the world.
Basically the United States doesn't give a damn about Israel: if it goes
down the drain, U.S. planners don't care one way or another, there's no
moral obligation or anything else. But what they do care about is control of
the enormous oil resources of the Middle East. I mean, a big part of the way
you run the planet is by controlling Middle East oil, and in the late 1950s,
the United States began to recognize that Israel would be a very useful ally
in this respect. So for example, there's a National Security Council Memorandum in 1958 which points out that the main enemy of the United States
in the Middle East (as everywhere) is nationalism, what they call "radical
Arab nationalism"-which means independence, countries pursuing a course
other than submission to the needs of American power. Well, that's always
the enemy: the people there don't always see why the enormous wealth and
resources of the region have to be in the control of American and British
investors while they starve, they've never really gotten that into their headsand sometimes they try to do something about it. Alright,

126

Understanding Power

that's unacceptable to the United States, and one of the things they pointed
out is that a useful weapon against that sort of "radical Arab nationalism"
would be a highly militarized Israel, which would then be a reliable base
for U.S. power in the region.42
Now, that insight was not really acted upon extensively until the Six Day
War in 1967, when, with U.S. support, Israel essentially destroyed Nasser
[the Egyptian President)-who was regarded as the main Arab nationalist
force in the Middle East-and virtually all the other Arab armies in the region too. That won Israel a lot of points, it established them as what's called
a "strategic asset" -that is, a military force that can be used as an outlet for
U.S. power. In fact, at the time, Israel and Iran under the Shah (which were
allies, tacit allies) came to be regarded by American planners as two parts
of a tripartite U.S. system for controlling the Middle East. This consisted
first of all of Saudi Arabia, which is where most of the oil is, and then its
two gendarmes, pre-revolutionary Iran and Israel-the "Guardians of the
Gulf," as they were called, who were supposed to protect Saudi Arabia
from indigenous nationalist forces in the area. Of course, when the Shah
fell in the Iranian Revolution in 1979, Israel's role became even more important to the United States, it was the last "Guardian." 43
Meanwhile, Israel began to pick up secondary functions: it started to
serve as a mercenary state for the United States around the world. So in the
1960s, Israel started to be used as a conduit for intervening in the affairs of
black African countries, under a big C.I.A. subsidy. And in the 1970s and
Eighties, the United States increasingly turned to Israel as kind of a weapon
against other parts of the Third World-Israel would provide armaments and
training and computers and all sorts of other things to Third World dictatorships at times when it was hard for the U.S. government to give that
support directly. For instance, Israel acted as the main U.S. contact with the
South African military for years, right through the embargo [the U.N. Security Council imposed a mandatory arms embargo on South Africa in
1977 after the U.S. and Britain had vetoed even stronger resolutions).44
Well, that's a very useful alliance, and that's another reason why Israel gets
such extraordinary amounts of U.S. aid.45
The Threat of Peace
But notice that this whole system only works as long as Israel remains
embattled. So suppose there was a real peace settlement in the Middle East,
and Israel was just integrated into the region as its most technologically
advanced country, kind of like Switzerland or Luxembourg or something.
Well, at that point its value to the United States is essentially over-we already have Luxembourg, we don't need another one. Israel's value to the
United States depends on the fact that it is threatened with destruction: that
makes them completely dependent on the United States for survival, and

Chapter Four

127

therefore extremely reliable-because if the rug ever is pulled out from
under them in a situation of real conflict, they will get destroyed.
And that reasoning has held right up to the present. I mean, it's easy to
show that the United States has blocked every move towards a political settlement that has come along in the Middle East-often we've just vetoed
them at the U.N. Security Counci1.46 In fact, up until very recently, it's been
impossible in the United States even to talk about a political settlement.
The official line in the United States has been, "The Arabs want to kill all
the Jews and throw them into the sea" -with only two exceptions. One is
King Hussein of Jordan, who's a "moderate," because he's on our side. And
the other was President Sadat of Egypt, who in 1977 realized the error of
his ways, so he flew to Jerusalem and became a man of peace-and that's
why the Arabs killed him, because the Arabs'll kill anybody who's for
peace [Sadat was assassinated in 1981]. That has been the official line in
the United States, and you simply cannot deviate from it in the press or
scholarship.
It's total lies from beginning to end. Take Sadat: Sadat made a peace
offer to Israel in February 1971, a better offer from Israel's point of view
than the one he later initiated in 1977 [which led to the Camp David peace
talks]. It was a full peace treaty exactly in accord with U.N. Resolution 242
[which had called for a return to pre-June 1967 borders in the region with
security guarantees, but made no mention of Palestinian rights ]-the United
States and Israel turned it down, therefore it's out of history. 47 In January
1976, Syria, Jordan and Egypt proposed a two-state peace settlement at the
U.N. Security Council on the basis of U.N. 242, and the P.L.O. supported
the proposal-it called for territorial guarantees, the whole business: the
United States vetoed it, so it's out of history, it didn't happen.48 And it just
goes on from there: the United States was unwilling to support any of these
peace offers, so they're out of history, they're down Orwell's memory hole.
49

In fact, it's even at the point where journals in the United States will not
permit letters referring to these proposals; the degree of control on this is
startling, actually. For example, a few years ago George Will wrote a column in Newsweek called "Mideast Truth and Falsehood," about how peace
activists are lying about the Middle East, everything they say is a lie. And
in the article, there was one statement that had a vague relation to fact: he
said that Sadat had refused to deal with Israel until 1977.50 So I wrote them
a letter, the kind of letter you write to Newsweek-you know, four lines-in
which I said, "Will has one statement of fact, it's false; Sadat made a peace
offer in 1971, and Israel and the United States turned it down." Well, a
couple days later I got a call from a research editor who checks facts for the
Newsweek "Letters" column. She said: "We're kind of interested in your
letter, where did you get those facts?" So I told her, "Well, they're published in Newsweek, on February 8, 1971 "-which is true, because it was a
big proposal, it just happened to go down the memory hole in the United

128

Understanding Power

States because it was the wrong story.51 So she looked it up and called me
back, and said, "Yeah, you're right, we found it there; okay, we'll run your
letter." An hour later she called again and said, "Gee, I'm sorry, but we
can't run the letter." I said, "What's the problem?" She said, "Well, the editor mentioned it to Will and he's having a tantrum; they decided they can't
run it." Well, okay.
But the point is, in Newsweek and the New York Times and the Washington Post and so on, you simply cannot state these facts-it's like belief in
divinity or something, the lies have become immutable truth.
WOMAN: Then what happened with the Camp David Accords-why did the
United States and Israel agree to deal with Egypt at that point?
Well, if you look back to around 1971 or so, you'll find that all the
American ambassadors in the Middle East were warning Kissinger that
there was going to be a war if the United States kept blocking every diplomatic option for resolving the conflict. 52 Even the big oil companies were
in favor of a political settlement, they were telling the White House: "Look,
if you block every diplomatic option, the Arabs are going to go to war,
they've got no choice." 53 But in the White House they were just laughing,
it was all a big joke-just like they were laughing in Israel. And on purely
racist grounds.
See, intelligence systems are very flawed institutions: they're highly
ideological, they're fanatic, they're racist, and as a result the information
that comes through them is usually grossly distorted. Well, in this case the
intelligence information was, "Arabs don't know how to fight." The chief of
Israeli military intelligence, Yehosifat Harkabi, his line was, "War is not
the Arab's game"-you know, these gooks don't know which end of the gun
to hold, you don't have to worry about them. And the American military,
the C.I.A., everyone obviously was producing the same information: if
Sadat mobilizes an army in the Sinai, you kind of laugh, "What do these
guys think they're doing? We'll leave seven hundred men on the Bar-Lev
Line and that'll stop them." 54 So the United States refused to pursue a
diplomatic settlement, and that refusal then brought on the 1973 war-where
suddenly it turned out that war was the Arab's game: the Egyptians won a
major victory in the Sinai, it was quite a military operation, in fact. And it
just shocked U.S. and Israeli intelligence, it really frightened them-because
like I say, state planners usually understand violence, even if they can't understand anything else. So in the '73 war, it suddenly became clear that the
assumption that "war is not the Arab's game" was false: Egypt wasn't a
military basket-case.
Okay, as long as Egypt was a basket-case, the United States had been
content to let them be a Russian ally-if the Russians want to sink money
into this morass, that's fine, we don't mind, we just laugh at them. But in the
1973 war, it suddenly became clear that Egypt wasn't just a basket-case,

Chapter Four

129

they knew how to shoot and do all these other things that matter, so
Kissinger decided to accept what had in fact been long-standing Egyptian
offers to become an American client-state. Well, that's what Egypt had
wanted all along, so they immediately kicked out the Russians and got on
the American gravy-train. And now they're the second-biggest recipient of
u.s. aid, though still way behind Israel-and at that point Sadat became a
"moderate," because he had switched to our side. And since Egypt was
considered the major Arab deterrent to hawkish Israeli policies, the obvious
back-up position was just to remove them from the conflict, so Israel would
be free to solidify its control in the region-as it has done, in fact. See, before
the 1973 war, U.S. planners thought that Israel didn't have to worry about
any Arab forces at all. Now they saw that that was wrong-so they moved to
extract Egypt from the conflict. And that was the great achievement of the
Camp David peace process: it enabled Israel to integrate the Occupied
Territories and attack Lebanon without any Egyptian deterrent. Alright, try
to say that in the u.S. media.
Incidentally, by now you are beginning to be able to say it in the
strategic analysis literature. So if you read articles by strategic analysts,
they're starting to say, yeah, that's the way it worked. 55 Of course that's
the way it worked, that's the way it was designed. That's the way it was
obviously going to work right at the time of Camp David-I mean, I was
writing about this in 1977.56 If you eliminate the major Arab deterrent force
and increase U.S. aid to Israel to the level of 50 percent of total U.S. aid
worldwide, and Israel is committed to integrating the Occupied Territories
and attacking and disrupting Lebanon, if you get that configuration of
events, what do you think is going to happen? It's transparent, a child could
figure it out. But you can't say it, because to say it would imply that the
United States is not the leader of the world peace forces, and is not
interested in justice and freedom and human rights around the world.
Therefore you can't say any of these things here, and by now you probably
can't even see them.
Water and the Occupied Territories
MAN: But doesn't Israel need the Occupied Territories for defense purposes, with respect to the other Arab states on its borders-isn't that the
main reason for holding on to them?
Well, there I can only talk about the way that they look at it-the way the
top Israeli decision-makers look at it. So there's a very interesting book
published in Hebrew, called Mechiro shellhud, which is a detailed documentary record of the period from 1967 to 1977, when the Labor Party was
in power in Israel [the Occupied Territories were originally seized by Israel
in 1967]. It's by a guy named Yossi Beilin, who was the top advisor to
Shimon Peres and is kind of a Labor Party dove, and he had access to

130

Understanding Power

all sorts of Labor Party documents. And the book is almost a daily record
of cabinet meetings in Israel between 1967 and '77-right in the period when
they were trying to figure out just what to do with the Occupied Territories.
57

Well, there's virtually no mention of security, barely a mention of it. One
thing that does get mentioned a lot is what they call the "demographic
problem"-the problem of what do you do about too many Arabs in a Jewish
state. Okay, that's called the "demographic problem" in Israel, and in fact,
people here refer to it that way too. 58 The purpose of that term, which
sounds like kind of a neutral sociological term, is to disguise the fact that
it's a deeply racist notion-we would see that right off if we applied it here.
Like, suppose some group in New York City started talking about the "demographic problem"-there are too many Jews and blacks. There are too
many Jews and blacks in New York City, and we've got to do something
about it, because they're taking over-so we've got to deal with the "demographic problem." It wouldn't be very hard to decode this. But in Israel and
in this book of cabinet records, there's a lot of talk about the "demographic
problem," and it's easy to see what that means.
Another thing they talk about a lot is water-and that's a very crucial
thing, which is not discussed very much in the United States but it's probably the main reason why Israel is never going to give up the West Bank.
See, this is a very arid region, so water is more important than oil, and there
are very limited water resources in Israel. In fact, a lot of the wars in the
Middle East have been about water-for instance, the wars involving Israel
and Syria have usually been about the headwaters of the Jordan, which
come from Syria, Jordan, and Lebanon. And as a matter of fact, one of the
main reasons why Israel is holding on to the so-called "Security Zone" it
seized in southern Lebanon [in the 1982 invasion] is that that area includes
a mountain, Mount Hermon, which is a big part of the watershed that brings
water to the region. Actually, the invasion of Lebanon was probably an attempt, among other things, to get ahold of the Litani River, a little farther to
the north-but they were driven back by Shiite resistance and couldn't hold
on to it, so they had to pull back.
Well, economic facts are classified in Israel, so you can't be sure of the
exact numbers, but most of the studies on this, including some American
studies, indicate that Israel is getting about a third of its water from the
West Bank. And there really is no alternative to that, short of some sort of
technological innovation-like, maybe someday someone will invent a
technique of desalination, so they could use seawater. But at the moment,
there is no other alternative: there are no underground water sources except
the West Bank sources, Israel didn't get the Litani River, they obviously
aren't going to get the Nile-so there just is no other water source for them,
except the West Bank sources.
And in fact, one of the occupation policies that the Arabs in the West
Bank have found most onerous is that Israel forbids them to dig deep wells.

Chapter Four

131

Well, that's very hard on Arab agriculture-I mean, an Arab farmer on the
West Bank has the same water allotment for farming that a Jewish citydweller in Tel Aviv has just for drinking. Think about that: the drinking-water for a Jewish city resident is the same as the total water for an Arab
farmer, who's got to do irrigation, and take care of livestock, and do everything else you do on a farm. And the Arabs are not allowed to sink deep
wells, they're only allowed to sink shallow wells that you do without equipment-the deep wells are Jewish wells, only for Jewish settlers, and they get
something like twelve times as much water, or some huge amount more
water. 59
Okay, so water's a big issue that comes up in the documents, there's the
"demographic problem," there are historical reasons, and some other things
too-but the fact is, there is very little talk about security concerns.
I mperial Ambitions and the Arab Threat
MAN: Well, I don't know about these cabinet records-but the fact is that
when Israel was originally conceived in 1948, it was immediately lunged
upon by virtually everybody on its borders: all of the Arab countries immediately tried to destroy it, and prevent its very existence. Wouldn't you say
the Israeli people are justified in remembering that history still, as they set
national policies today?
Well, you're right that that's the standard line about what happened. But
it's not true. Keep in mind the background facts. In November 1947, the
U.N. General Assembly made a recommendation for a three-way partition
of Palestine into a Jewish state, an Arab state, and a small internationallyadministered zone that would have included Jerusalem [the area was under
British imperial control].60 Now, I should stress that this was a General
Assembly recommendation, and General Assembly recommendations have
no force: they are only recommendations. Israel insists that they have no
force, I should say-Israel is by far the greatest violator of General Assembly
recommendations, beginning in December 1948, when Israel rejected the
General Assembly call for allowing Palestinian refugees the right of return
[they had fled violence that broke out in Palestine beginning in November
1947]. In fact, Israel was accepted into the United Nations on condition that
it accept that requirement, and it claimed that it would accept it-but then it
immediately refused to carry through on that promise.6l And it goes on
right until today: I don't know how many, but probably hundreds of General
Assembly recommendations have been rejected by Israel.
Anyway, such a recommendation was made by the General Assembly in
November 1947, and at that point war broke out in Palestine among the
Palestinians and the Zionists Jewish nationalists]. The Zionists were by far

132

Understanding Power

the more powerful and better organized force, and by May 1948, when the
state of Israel was formally established, about 300,000 Palestinians already
had been expelled from their homes or had fled the fighting, and the Zionists controlled a region well beyond the area of the original Jewish state that
had been proposed by the U.N.62 Now, it's then that Israel was attacked by
its neighbors-in May 1948; it's then, after the Zionists had taken control of
this much larger part of the region and hundreds of thousands of civilians
had been forced out, not before.
And furthermore, there's very good scholarship on this that's come out in
Israel now which shows, I think pretty conclusively, that the intervention of
the Arab states was very reluctant, and that it was to a large extent directed
not against Israel, but against King Abdullah of Transjordan (what's now
Jordan), who was basically a client ruler for the British. And the Arab states
in fact did it because they felt that Abdullah was just a pawn of Britain, and
they had good reason to believe that he was assisting the British in
reconstructing their imperial system in the region in various ways [Britain
had arranged to turn formal administration of Palestine over to the United
Nations in May 1948]. It'll be a hundred years before any of this material
enters mainstream American scholarship, I should say-but it's very good
scholarship, and it's important.63
So anyway, the area that's now Jordan was being ruled by a British
client, and the other Arab states in the region regarded the Jordanian military, quite correctly, as just a British army with kind of a guy with Arab
headgear leading them. And they were very much concerned about the fact
(which they knew at some level, even if they didn't know all of the details)
that Abdullah and the Zionists were cooperating in a plan to prevent the establishment of a Palestinian state-which in fact did happen, Abdullah and
the Zionists did carry out that plan of partitioning the area that was to be the
Palestinian state between them.64 And furthermore, Abdullah also had much
greater plans of his own: he wanted to take over Syria, and become the king
of "Greater Syria." And there was apparently a plan in which Israel was
going to attack Syria, and then Abdullah was going to move into Syria to
defend the Syrians and end up afterwards holding the whole pie, by prearrangement. Well, that plan never quite got worked out, as history showsbut the other Arab states had wind of it, so then they moved in against Israel
to try to block Abdullah's goals.65
And there were powerful reasons for that, remember: this was the period
of decolonization, and the major concern of the people of the region at the
time was to get the British out-and Abdullah was just a pawn of the British,
and they didn't want to see British imperialism reestablished. Of course,
they didn't want the state of Israel around either, and they opposed it-but
that was probably a minor consideration in the attack; really a minor
consideration, actually. In fact, in 1949 both Syria and Egypt made very
explicit proposals for a peace treaty with Israel, and Israel rejected themIsrael didn't want such a peace treaty.66

Chapter Four

133

Alright, the reason all of this material is only coming out recently is
there are rules in Israel about not releasing archives until several decades
later--so the history is usually written about thirty or forty years late (and
then of course, it's also very distorted for other reasons). But there's really
nothing in any of the things I've said that should be a great surprise to
anyone who really knows the history-yes, now there are archival records
and new scholarship to back it up, and I think it's very convincing
scholarship and will come to be recognized as the right story. But it's really
no great surprise: something like that was always understood. For example,
the agreement between Ben-Gurion [first Israeli Prime Minister] and
Abdullah to partition Palestine has been known for years-that's come out in
memoirs, everybody's talked about it, and so on.67 But you're right, it's not
part of the standard line in the United States-it just happens to be the correct
story.
MAN: But just to challenge you on some of this-I thought that what Israel
was trying to preserve in the agreement to partition Palestine was the idea
that Jordan would not send troops into Israel. That's why they were really
cooperating with Abdullah--Ben-Gurion and the rest of the Israeli leadership at the time were very concerned about the fact that there were huge
trained armies in Jordan, which were a big threat to them.
No, on the contrary-they weren't much concerned about that. In fact,
Ben-Gurion actually had to intervene to prevent his armies from taking
over part of what's now the West Bank [in October 1948], because the Jordanian Legion had already been essentially destroyed and was out of arms,
and the Israeli military command thought they could easily take over more
territory. See, Yigal Allon, who was the commander of the Israeli army,
didn't know about this agreement with Abdullah to prevent the establishment of a Palestinian state-and there was a bitter battle between Ben-Gurion and the army, in which Ben-Gurion had to hold the army back in
order to honor this secret agreement he had entered into.68 So really there
was no military threat from Jordan, not at all.
MAN: But the Israeli army held back at that point because Ben-Gurion still
had some hope that perhaps peace would prevail if they held back.
No-in fact we know very well what Ben-Gurion wanted, because he left
ample diaries and so on. And his position, which he was very clear and
explicit about-and there's a lot of documentation about this in my book The
Fateful Triangle-was that Israel should not accept any boundaries, regardless of whether there was peace or not, because the limits of what he
called "Zionist aspiration" are much broader: they include southern Syria,
Transjordan, big areas which he laid out. And he said, we'll kind of hold off
now, but somehow we'll ultimately get them all-in fact, with regard to
Lebanon, Ben-Gurion was proposing that Israel take over Southern

134

Understanding Power

Lebanon on some pretext as late as the mid-1950s.69 So we know all about
what he wanted, and like the rest, it's very different from the stories you always hear.
Prospects for the Palestinians
WOMAN: Then is there any hope at all for justice for the hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who have been displaced from their
homeland over the years-as well as for those who are still in Israel and the
Territories?
Well, the objective reality is that most of the Palestinian refugees will
never go back to Palestine-that's just a fact of life, just like the American
Indians will never get back what they had on the American continent. So in
that respect, there'll never be justice. And there's just no way out of that: if
there was ever any prospect of Palestinians in any large number going back
to what was formerly Palestine, Israel would probably blow up the world,
which they're capable of doing,7° And that's never going to happen.
So the only question is, what kind of limited form of justice can be
achieved? And that's tricky. I mean, if Israel can't suppress the Intifada at a
reasonable cost, the United States and Israel might shift from their rejectionist stance and become willing to accept some variety of Palestinian selfdetermination. And if that happens, then you'll have to look seriously at
what you mean by a "two-state settlement"-and the reality is, it's not very
easy to envision, for some of the reasons I've mentioned: there are resource
problems, there are problems of integration of the areas, there are bordersetting issues. Remember that the U.N. resolution partitioning Palestine [in
1947] did not strictly speaking call for two states, it called for an economic
confederation-and that was quite realistic.71 Anybody who's been there
knows that two states don't make much sense-because the regions are just
too closely integrated, and the borders are too crazy, and when you look
even more seriously you see even further that it wouldn't work. So the only
thing that makes any sense is some sort of confederation. But you can
pretty well predict what will happen: there will be two states, except only
one of the states will really exist, the other one will just collect garbage.
In fact, I suspect that'll be the next proposal, and it'll all come under the
banner of a "two state" settlement-and that's going to be a lot harder to
argue about, because then people will really have to think behind the headlines to see what's going on. But achieving some kind of meaningful federation between the Israelis and the Palestinians, with really divided
sovereignty-that's going to be extremely hard, we just have to face that.
And that's about the only kind of solution that makes any sense, I think--it's
the only limited form of justice I can see.

Chapter Four

135

MAN: There's also the different mentality between the Arabs and Jews that
figures into it too, don't you think-isn't that always going to get in the way
of peace?
They're the same kind of people, they have the same kind of mentality.
They bleed when they're cut, they mourn when their children are killed. I'm
not aware of any difference between them.
Legitimacy in History
WOMAN: Do you think the passage of time can give legitimacy to Israel,
even if maybe it was started out on the wrong sort of basis, displacing the
indigenous population in a racist manner and so on?
Well, yeah-the general answer to your question just has to be yes. If not,
we'd have to go back to the days of hunter-gatherer societies, because all of
history has been illegitimate.
I mean, take a case close to the Palestinians, which we as Americans
ought to think about-take the United States. Now, I think the treatment of
the Palestinians by Israel has been bad, but in comparison to the treatment
of the native population here by our forefathers, it's been a paradise.
Here in the United States, we just committed genocide. Period. Pure
genocide. And it wasn't just in the United States, it was all up and down the
Hemisphere. Current estimates are that north of the Rio Grande, there were
about twelve to fifteen million Native Americans at the time Columbus
landed, something like that. By the time Europeans reached the continental
borders of the United States, there were about 200,000. Okay: mass
genocide. Across the whole Western Hemisphere, the population decline
was probably on the order of from a hundred million people to about five
million.72 That's pretty serious stuff-it was horrifying right from the beginning in the early seventeenth century, then it got worse after the United
States was established, and it just continued until finally the native populations were basically stuck away in little enclaves. The history of treaty violations by the United States is just grotesque: treaties with the Indian
nations by law have a status the same as that of treaties among sovereign
states, but throughout our history nobody ever paid the slightest attention to
them--as soon as you wanted more land, you just forgot the treaty and
robbed it; it's a very ugly and vicious history.73 Hitler in fact used the
treatment of the Native Americans as a model, explicitly--he said, that's
what we're going to do with the Jews.74
In fact, a book came out in Germany recently called, in German, The
Five Hundred Year Reich--actually, it's part of a big effort that's beginning
to develop around the world to try to turn 1992 into a year of memory of
genocide, instead of a year of celebration of the 500th anniversary of what's

136

Understanding Power

called Columbus's "discovery" of America. And in Germany, people understand that title: Hitler was going to establish a "Thousand Year Reich," and
the point of the book is that the colonization of the Western Hemisphere
was essentially Hitlerian-and it's lasted for five hundred years.75
I should add, actually, that throughout American history this genocide
has been accepted as perfectly legitimate. So for example, there were
people who spoke up for blacks and opposed slavery-there were the
Abolitionists and there was the Civil Rights Movement. But you won't find
much support for the American Indians. And the same was true of
scholarship: for instance, in Samuel Eliot Morison's history of Columbusyou know, big Harvard historian-he talks about what a great man Columbus
was, terrific person and so on, and then he has this little line saying, of
course Columbus did set off a program of what he calls "complete
genocide," and he was a major mass-murderer himself. But then he says,
that was only a minor flaw, he was really a terrific seaman, this and that
and the other thing.76
In fact, let me tell you a personal story to indicate just how far out of history all of this really is. A few Thanksgivings ago I took a walk with some
friends and family in a National Park, and we came across a tombstone
which had just been put in along the path. It said: "Here lies an Indian
woman, a Wampanoag, whose family and tribe gave of themselves and
their land that this great nation might be born and grow." Okay, "gave of
themselves and their land"-in fact, were murdered, scattered, dispersed, and
we stole their land, that's what we're sitting on. You know, there can't be
anything more illegitimate: the whole history of this country is illegitimate.
Our forefathers stole about a third of Mexico in a war in which they
claimed that Mexico attacked us, but if you look back it turns out that that
"attack" took place inside of Mexican territory [the U.S. acquired the area
from Texas to California after the Mexican War in 1848].77 And it goes on
and on. So you know, what can be legitimate?
Take the development of the state system in Europe. The state system in
Europe, which was finally sort of established in 1945, is the result of
savage wars and murders and atrocities going back hundreds and hundreds
of years. In fact, the main reason why the plague of European civilization
was able to spread all over the world in the past five hundred years is that
the Europeans were just a lot more vicious and savage than anyone else,
because they'd had a lot more practice murdering one another-so when they
came to other places, they knew how to do it, and were very good at it.
Well, the European state system has continued to be an extremely bloody
and brutal arrangement, right to today. I mean, there are wars all over the
Third World just because the national boundaries the European invaders
imposed on these places have nothing to do with anything, except where
one European power could expand at the expense of other European
powers.
Okay, if anything has no legitimacy, it's this. But that's our nation-state
system, and we just have to begin with it. I mean, it's there, and it has whatever legitimacy-I wouldn't say that it's "legitimate," I'd just say that it ex-

Chapter Four

137

ists, we have to recognize that it exists, and states have to be given
whatever rights they are accorded in the international system. But the
indigenous populations have to be given comparable rights too, I think-at
least. So when I denounce apologetics for Israel's oppression, remember,
it's not in any particular criticism of Israel. In fact, I think Israel is just as
ugly a state as every other state. The only difference is that Israel has a
fabricated image in the United States-it's regarded as having some unique
moral quality, and there's all sorts of imagery about purity of arms, and
high noble intent and so on.78 It's complete mythology, just pure fabrication:
Israel's a country like every other country, and we should recognize that
and stop the nonsense. To talk about legitimacy is ridiculous-the word
doesn't apply, to their history or anyone else's.
Qualifications to Speak on World Affairs; A
Presidential Campaign
MAN: Mr. Chomsky, I'm wondering what specific qualifications you have
to be able to speak all around the country about world affairs?
None whatsoever. I mean, the qualifications that I have to speak on
world affairs are exactly the same ones Henry Kissinger has, and Walt Rostow has, or anybody in the Political Science Department, professional historians-none, none that you don't have. The only difference is, I don't
pretend to have qualifications, nor do I pretend that qualifications are
needed. I mean, if somebody were to ask me to give a talk on quantum
physics, I'd refuse-because I don't understand enough. But world affairs are
trivial: there's nothing in the social sciences or history or whatever that is
beyond the intellectual capacities of an ordinary fifteen-year-old. You have
to do a little work, you have to do some reading, you have to be able to
think, but there's nothing deep-if there are any theories around that require
some special kind of training to understand, then they've been kept a
carefully guarded secret.
In fact, I think the idea that you're supposed to have special qualifications to talk about world affairs is just another scam-it's kind of like
Leninism [position that socialist revolution should be led by a "vanguard"
party]: it's just another technique for making the population feel that they
don't know anything, and they'd better just stay out of it and let us smart
guys run it. In order to do that, what you pretend is that there's some esoteric discipline, and you've got to have some letters after your name before
you can say anything about it. The fact is, that's a joke.
MAN: But don't you also use that system too, because of your name-recognition and the fact that you're a famous linguist? I mean, would I be
invited to go somewhere and give talks?

138

Understanding Power

You think 1 was invited here because people know me as a linguist?
Okay, if that was the reason, then it was a bad mistake. But there are plenty
of other linguists around, and they aren't getting invited to places like thisso 1 don't really think that can be the reason. 1 assumed that the reason is
that these are topics that I've written a lot about, and I've spoken a lot about,
and I've demonstrated a lot about, and I've gone to jail about, and so on and
so forth-I assumed that's the reason. If it's not, well, then it's a bad mistake.
If anybody thinks that you should listen to me because I'm a professor at
M.IT., that's nonsense. You should decide whether something makes sense
by its content, not by the letters after the name of the person who says it.
And the idea that you're supposed to have special qualifications to talk
about things that are common sense, that's just another scam-it's another
way to try to marginalize people, and you shouldn't fall for it.
WOMAN: Seeing as you're such a big draw with audiences, though, and
since you do have some name-recognition-I'm wondering, what would you
think about running a Presidential campaign? I mean, huge crowds come
out to listen to your talks all around the country, those people might
support something like that and want to begin getting involved with it.
Well, it's true about the audiences-but 1 don't think that has to do with
name-recognition or anything like that. See, there are only about ten people
in the country, literally, who do this kind of thing-John Stockwell, Alex
Cockburn, Dan Ellsberg, Howard Zinn, Holly Sklar, only a couple othersand we all get the same reaction. 1 think it's just a matter of people all over
the country being hungry to hear a different viewpoint. And what's more,
we all get the same reaction wherever we go-it's the same in towns where
nobody's ever heard of me. Like, 1 was in central Michigan last week, they
didn't know who 1 was from Adam, but it was the same kind of crowd.
WOMAN: But seeing as you do get all this draw, why not run a
Presidential campaign?
First of all, there's nobody around to run for President, and if there
were ...
WOMAN: You, Stockwell ...
Anybody who wants to be President, you should right away say, "I don't
want to hear that guy anymore."
WOMAN: I'm sorry?
You should say, "I don't want to listen to that person anymore." Anybody who wants to become your leader, you should say, "I don't want to
follow." That's like a rule of thumb which almost never fails.

Chapter Four

139

WOMAN: But what about just to create a forum where more of the population would hear this different point of view?
Well, if you want to use it kind of instrumentally, like jujitsu or something-use the properties of the system against it-okay. But I don't really
think that makes any sense, frankly.
WOMAN: The form of government we have just has to be overthrown, in
your view? There's no way of doing it through reform?
It's not a relevant distinction: if you could ever get to the point where a
reformist candidate had a chance, you'd already have won, you'd already
have done the main thing. The main thing is to develop the kind of mass
support which would make a revolution meaningful. At that point, some
crook will come along and say, "I'm your leader, I'll do it for you."
MAN: What do you think could have that effect, though? Just like Noam
Chomsky, say, going and talking to five hundred people here and there?
Just keep plugging away?
Yeah, you keep plugging away-that's the way social change takes place.
That's the way every social change in history has taken place: by a lot of
people, who nobody ever heard of, doing work.
MAN: Did you go through a phase of hopelessness, or ...
Yeah, every evening.
MAN: I feel like I'm kind of stuck in one.
Every evening. I mean, look: if you want to feel hopeless, there are a lot
of things you could feel hopeless about. If you want to sort of work out objectively what's the chance that the human species will survive for another
century, probably not very high. But I mean, what's the point?
MAN: You've just got to work at it.
Yeah, what's the point? First of all, those predictions don't mean anything-they're more just a reflection of your mood or your personality than
anything else. And if you act on that assumption, then you're guaranteeing
that that'll happen. If you act on the assumption that things can change, well,
maybe they will. Okay, the only rational choice, given those alternatives, is
to forget the pessimism.

5

Ruling the World
Based on discussions in New York, Massachusetts, Maryland, Colorado,
Illinois, and Ontario in 1990 and between 1993 and 1996.

Soviet Versus Western Economic Development
WOMAN: In a best-case scenario for the future, how do you envision an
economic system that works?
Well, our economic system "works," it just works in the interests of the
masters, and I'd like to see one that works in the interests of the general
population. And that will only happen when they are the "principal architects" of policy, to borrow Adam Smith's phrase.1 I mean, as long as power
is narrowly concentrated, whether in the economic or the political system,
you know who's going to benefit from the policies-you don't have to be a
genius to figure that out. That's why democracy would be a good thing for
the general public. But of course, achieving real democracy will require that
the whole system of corporate capitalism be completely dismantled-because
it's radically anti-democratic. And that can't be done by a stroke of the pen,
you know: you have to build up alternative popular institutions, which could
allow control over society's investment decisions to be moved into the hands
of working people and communities. That's a long job, it requires building
up an entire cultural and institutional basis for the changes, it's not
something that's just going to happen on its own. There are people who have
written about what such a system might look like-kind of a "participatory
economy," it's sometimes called.2 But sure, that's the way to go, I think.
MAN: But Mr. Chomsky, we just went through a long experience with anticapitalism like the kind you're advocating-and it didn't work out very well.
It was tried, and the experiment failed. Why are you now advocating the
same old thing again?
140

like them or not-what you ought to ask is, how did societies that were like
Chapter Five
141
I'm not. On the contrary-I presume you're talking about the Soviet
Union?
MAN: Exactly.
Well, there are really two points that ought to be made. First of all, the
Soviet Union was basically a capitalist system. The first thing that Lenin
and Trotsky did when they took power in October 1917, remember, was to
destroy all of the forms of socialist initiative that had developed in Russia
since the start of the Russian Revolution in February 1917 [the Russian
Tsar was overthrown by popular revolution in February 1917; Lenin's
Bolshevik Party took over eight months later in a military coup]. Just now I
was talking about workers and communities participating in decisionmaking-the first thing the Bolsheviks did was to destroy that, totally. They
destroyed the factory councils, they undermined the soviets [elected local
governing bodies], they eliminated the Constituent Assembly
[democratically elected parliament initially dominated by a rival socialist
group, which was to govern Russia but was dispersed by Bolshevik troops
in January 1918]. In fact, they dismantled every form of popular
organization in Russia and set up a command economy with wages and
profits, on sort of a centralized state-capitalist model. 3 So on the one hand,
the example you're referring to is just the extreme opposite of what I was
talking about, not the same.
Secondly comes another question. Whatever you think of the Soviet economic system, did it work or did it fail? Well, in a culture with deeply totalitarian strains, like ours, we always ask an idiotic question about that: we
ask, how does Russia compare economically with Western Europe, or with
the United States? And the answer is, it looks pretty bad. But an eight-yearold would know the problem with that question: these economies haven't
been alike for six hundred years-you'd have to go back to the preColumbian period before East and West Europe were anything more or less
alike economically. Eastern Europe had started becoming sort of a Third
World service-area for Western Europe even before the time of Columbus,
providing resources and raw materials for the emerging textile and metal
industries of the West. And for centuries, Russia remained a deeply impoverished Third World country.4 I mean, there were a few small pockets of
development there and also a rich sector of elites, writers and so on-but
that's like every Third World country: Latin American literature is some of
the richest in the world, for example, even though its people are some of the
most miserable in the world. And if you just look at the Soviet Union's economic development in the twentieth century, it's extremely revealing. For
instance, the proportion of Eastern European to Western European income
was declining until around 1913, then it started rising very fast until around
1950, when it kind of leveled off. Then in the mid-I960s, as the Soviet
economy began to stagnate, the proportion started to decline a bit, then it
declined a bit more into the late 1980s. After 1989, when the Soviet Em-

142

Understanding Power

pire finally broke up, it went into free-fall-and it is now again approximately what it was in 1913.5 Okay, that tells you something about whether
the Soviet economic model was successful or not.
Now, suppose we asked a rational question, instead of asking an insane
question like "how did the Soviet Union compare with Western Europe?" If
you want to evaluate alternative modes of economic development--whether
you like them or not-what you ought to ask is, how did societies that were
like
Chapter Five 141
the Soviet Union in 1910 compare with it in 1990? Well, history doesn't
offer precise analogs, but there are good choices. So we could compare
Russia and Brazil, say, or Bulgaria and Guatemala-those are reasonable
compathe Soviet Union in 1910 compare with it in 1990? Well, history
doesn't offer precise analogs, but there are good choices. So we could
compare Russia and Brazil, say, or Bulgaria and Guatemala-those are reasonable comparisons. Brazil, for example, ought to be a super-rich country:
it has unbelievable natural resources, it has no enemies, it hasn't been practically destroyed three times by invasions in this century [i.e. the Soviet
Union suffered massive losses in both World Wars and the 1918 Western
intervention in its Civil War]. In fact, it's a lot better equipped to develop
than the Soviet Union ever was. Okay, just compare Brazil and Russiathat's a sane comparison.
Well, there's a good reason why nobody undertakes it, and we only make
idiotic comparisons-because if you compare Brazil and Russia, or Guatemala and Hungary, you get the wrong answer. Brazil, for maybe 5 or 10
percent of its population, is indeed like Western Europe-and for around 80
percent of its population, it's kind of like Central Africa. In fact, for
probably 80 percent of the Brazilian population, Soviet Russia would have
looked like heaven. If a Guatemalan peasant suddenly landed in Bulgaria,
he'd probably think he'd gone to paradise or something. So therefore we
don't make those comparisons, we only make crazy comparisons, which
anybody who thinks for a second would see are preposterous. And everybody here does make them: all the academics make them, all the development economists make them, the newspaper commentators make them. But
just think for a second: if you want to know how successful the Soviet
economic system was, compare Russia in 1990 with someplace that was
like it in 1910. Is that such a brilliant insight?
In fact, the World Bank gave its own analysis of the success of the
Soviet development model. The World Bank is not a radical outfit, as I'm
sure you realize, but in 1990 it described Russia and China as "relatively
successful societies that developed by extricating themselves from the
international market," although finally they ran into trouble and had to
return to the fold.6 But "relatively successful"-and as compared with
countries they were like before their revolutions, very successful.
In fact, that's exactly what the U.S. was worried about in the Cold War in
the first place, if you want to know the truth-that Soviet economic development just looked too good to poor Third World countries, it was a
model they wanted to follow. I mean, in part the Cold War went on because
it turned out to be a very good way for the two superpowers to keep control
over their respective empires-each using fear of the other to mobilize its

Chapter Five

143

own population, and at the same time kind of tacitly agreeing not to interfere with the other's domains. But for the U.S., the origin of the Cold War
and in fact the stated concern of American planners throughout-was that a
huge area of the traditional Third World had extricated itself from exploitation by the West, and was now starting to pursue an independent
course.7 So if you read the declassified internal government record-of which
we have plenty by now-you'll see that the main concern of top Western
planners right into the 1960s was that the example of Soviet development
was threatening to break apart the whole American world system, because
Russia was in fact doing so well. For example, guys like John Foster Dulles
[American Secretary of State] and Harold Macmillan [British Prime
Minister] were frightened out of their wits by Russia's developmental
success-and it was successful. 8 I mean, notice that Russia is not referred to
as a "Third World" country today, it's called a "failed developed country" or
something like that-in other words, it did develop, although ultimately it
failed, and now we can go ahead and start reintegrating it back into the
traditional Third World again.
And in fact, you can see that process taking place ever since the Soviet
Empire dissolved-and with the standard effects. The so-called "economic
reforms" we've been instituting in the former Soviet-bloc countries have
been an absolute catastrophe for most of their populations-but Western
investors and a standard Third World elite of super-rich are making huge
fortunes, in part by skimming off most of the "aid" that gets sent there, in
various ways.9 In fact, U.N.I.C.E.F. [United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund] put out a study a little while ago estimating just the
simple human cost, like deaths, of what they call the "capitalist reforms" in
Russia and Poland and the others (and incidentally, they approved of the
reforms)-and for Russia, they calculated that there have been about a halfmillion extra deaths a year just as a result of them. Poland's a smaller
country, so it was a smaller number, but the results were proportional
throughout the region. In the Czech Republic, the percentage of the population living in poverty has gone from 5.7 percent in 1989 to 18.2 percent in
1992; in Poland, the figures are something like from 20 percent to 40 percent. So if you walk down the streets of Warsaw now, sure, you'll find a lot
of nice stuff in the shop windows-but that's the same as in any Third World
country: plenty of wealth, very narrowly concentrated; and poverty,
starvation, death, and huge inequality for the vast majority.l0
And actually, that's the reason the so-called "Communist" Parties in
Eastern Europe and Russia are getting votes these days. I mean, when they
describe that here, they say, "it's nostalgia, they forget how bad it was in the
old days" -but there's no nostalgia. 11 I don't think anybody there actually
wants to go back to the Stalinist dungeon again-it's not that they're nostalgic
about the past, it's that they're apprehensive about the future. They can see
what's coming very well, namely Brazil and Guatemala, and as bad as their
system was, that's worse. Much worse.

144

Understanding Power
Supporting Terror

So the fact that Russia had pulled itself out of the West's traditional
Third World service-area and was developing on an independent course
was really one of the major motivations behind the Cold War. I mean, the
standard line you always hear about it is that we were opposing Stalin's terror-but that's total bullshit. First of all, we shouldn't even be able to repeat
that line without a sense of self-mockery, given our record. Do we oppose
anybody else's terror? Do we oppose Indonesia's terror in East Timor? Do
we oppose terror in Guatemala and El Salvador? Do we oppose what we
did to South Vietnam? No, we support terror all the time-in fact, we put it
in power.
Just take a look at U.S. aid, for instance. There have been a lot of studies
of it, including studies by people who write in the mainstream, and what
they show is that there is in fact a very high correlation between U.S. foreign aid and human rights abuses. For example, Lars Schoultz at the University of North Carolina-who's the major academic specialist on human
rights in Latin America and a highly respected mainstream scholar-published a study on U.S. aid to Latin America almost fifteen years ago, in
which he identified an extremely close correlation between U.S. aid and
torture: as he put it, the more a country tortures its citizens and the more
egregious are the violations of human rights, the higher is U.S. aid.
In fact, it's true at this very moment. The leading human rights violator
in the Western Hemisphere by a good margin is Colombia, which has just
an atrocious record-they have "social cleansing" programs, before every
election members of the opposition parties get murdered, labor union
leaders are murdered, students, dissidents are murdered, there are death
squads all around. Okay, more than half of U.S. aid to the entire
Hemisphere goes to Colombia, and the figure's increasing under Clinton. 13
Well, that's just normal, and like I say, similar results have been shown
world-wide.14 So claims about our concern for human rights are extremely
difficult to support: in precisely the regions of the world where we've had
the most control, the most hideous things you can imagine happen
systematically--people have to sell their organs for money in order to
survive, police death squads leave flayed bodies hanging by the roadsides
with their genitals stuffed in their mouths, children are enslaved, and worse,
those aren't the worst stories.15
As for Stalin, leaders in the West admired him, they didn't give a damn
about his terror. President Truman, for example, described Stalin as "smart
as hell," "honest," "we can get along with him," "it'll be a real catastrophe if
he dies." He said, what goes on in Russia I don't really care about, it's not
my business, so long as "we get our way 85 percent of the time."16 We get
our way 85 percent of the time with this nice, smart, decent, honest guy, we
can do business with him fine; he wants to murder 40 million people, what
do we care? Winston Churchill was the same: the British documents are

Chapter Five

145

now being declassified, and after the Yalta Conference in February 1945,
Churchill was praising Stalin in internal cabinet meetings as a man of honor
we can trust, who can help lead us forward to a new world, a "champion of
peace," "illustrious," and so on.17 He was particularly impressed with the
fact that Stalin didn't lift a finger while British troops occupied Greece [beginning in November 1944] and under Churchill's order treated Athens like
"a conquered city where a local rebellion is in progress," carrying out a big
massacre to destroy the Greek anti-Nazi resistance and restore the Nazi collaborators to power. Stalin just stood there quietly and let the British do it,
so Churchill said he's a really nice guy.18
None of these guys had anything against Stalin's crimes. What's more,
they had nothing against Hitler's crimes-all this talk about Western leaders'
principled opposition to atrocities is just a complete fabrication, totally
undermined by a look at the documentary record.19 It's just that if you've
been properly educated, you can't understand facts like these: even if the information is right in front of your eyes, you can't comprehend it.
"People's Democratic Socialist Republics"
Well, let me just end with one last point to do with your question. One of
the issues which has devastated a substantial portion of the left in recent
years, and caused enormous triumphalism elsewhere, is the alleged fact that
there's been this great battle between socialism and capitalism in the twentieth century, and in the end capitalism won and socialism lost-and the
reason we know that socialism lost is because the Soviet Union disintegrated. So you have big cover stories in The Nation about "The End of Socialism," and you have socialists who all their lives considered themselves
anti-Stalinist saying, "Yes, it's true, socialism has lost because Russia
failed."20 I mean, even to raise questions about this is something you're not
supposed to do in our culture, but let's try it. Suppose you ask a simple
question: namely, why do people like the editors at The Nation say that
"socialism" failed, why don't they say that "democracy" failed?-and the
proof that "democracy" failed is, look what happened to Eastern Europe.
After all, those countries also called themselves "democratic"-in fact, they
called themselves "People's Democracies," real advanced forms of democracy. So why don't we conclude that "democracy" failed, not just that "socialism" failed? Well, I haven't seen any articles anywhere saying, "Look,
democracy failed, let's forget about democracy." And it's obvious why: the
fact that they called themselves democratic doesn't mean that they were
democratic. Pretty obvious, right?
Okay, then in what sense did socialism fail? I mean, it's true that the
Soviet Union and its satellites in Eastern Europe called themselves "socialist" -but they also called themselves "democratic." Were they socialist?
Well, you can argue about what socialism is, but there are some ideas that

146

Understanding Power

are sort of at the core of it, like workers' control over production, elimination of wage labor, things like that. Did those countries have any of those
things? They weren't even a thought there. Again, in the pre-Bolshevik part
of the Russian Revolution, there were socialist initiatives-but they were
crushed instantly after the Bolsheviks took power, like within months. In
fact, just as the moves towards democracy in Russia were instantly destroyed, the moves towards socialism were equally instantly destroyed. The
Bolshevik takeover was a coup-and that was perfectly well understood at
the time, in fact. So if you look in the mainstream of the Marxist movement, Lenin's takeover was regarded as counter-revolutionary; if you look
at independent leftists like Bertrand Russell, it was instantly obvious to
them; to the libertarian left, it was a truism.21
But that truism has been driven out of people's heads over the years, as
part of a whole prolonged effort to discredit the very idea of socialism by
associating it with Soviet totalitarianism. And obviously that effort has
been extremely successful-that's why people can tell themselves that socialism failed when they look at what happened to the Soviet Union, and
not even see the slightest thing odd about it. And that's been a very valuable
propaganda triumph for elites in the West-because it's made it very easy to
undercut moves towards real changes in the social system here by saying,
"Well, that's socialism-and look what it leads to."
Okay, hopefully with the fall of the Soviet Union we can at least begin
to get past that barrier, and start recovering an understanding of what
socialism could really stand for.
The Organ Trade
WOMAN: You mentioned "social cleansing" and people in the Third World
selling their body parts for money. I don't know if you saw the recent Barbara Walters program ...
The answer is, "No by definition."
WOMAN: Well, I have to admit I watched it. She had a segment on some
American women who were attacked by villagers in Guatemala and put in
jail for allegedly stealing babies for the organ trade. The gist of the story
was that the Guatemalan people are totally out of their minds for supposing that babies are being taken out of the country and used for black market sale of organs.22 What I'd like to know is, do you know of any evidence
that this black market trade in children's organs does in fact exist, and do
you think the U.S. might be playing a role in it?
Well, look: suppose you started a rumor in Boston that children from the
Boston suburbs are being kidnapped by Guatemalans and taken to Guate-

Chapter Five

147

mala so their bodies could be used for organ transplants. How far off the
ground do you think that rumor would get?
WOMAN: Not far.
Okay, but in Guatemalan peasant societies it does get off the ground. Do
they have different genes than we do?
WOMAN: No.
Alright, so there's got to be some reason why the story spreads there and
it wouldn't spread here. And the reason is very clear. Though the specific
stories are doubtless false in this case, there's a background which is true-that's why nobody would believe it here, and they do believe it there: because they know about other things that go on.
For one thing, in Latin America there is plenty of kidnapping of children.
Now, what the children are used for, you can argue. Some of them are kidnapped for adoption, some of them are used for prostitution-and that goes
on throughout the U.S. domains. I mean, you take a look at the U.S.
domains-Thailand, Brazil, practically everywhere you go-there are young
children being kidnapped for sex-slavery, or just plain slavery.23 So
kidnapping of children unquestionably takes place. And there is strong evidence-I don't think anybody doubts it very much-that people in these regions are killed for organ transplants.24 Now, whether it's children or not, I
don't know. But if you take a look at the recent Amnesty International report on Colombia, for example, they say almost casually-just because it's so
routine-that in Colombia they carry out what's called "social cleansing": the
army and the paramilitary forces go through the cities and pick up
"undesirables," like homeless people, or homosexuals, or prostitutes, or
drug addicts, anybody they don't like, and they just take them and murder
them, then chop them up and mutilate their bodies for organ transplants.
That's called "social cleansing," and everybody thinks it's a great idea. 25
And again, this goes on throughout the U.s. domains.
In fact, it's even beginning now in Eastern Europe as they're being turned
back into another sector of the Third World-people are starting to sell organs to survive, like you sell a cornea or a kidney or something.26
WOMAN: Your own?
Yeah, your own. You just sell it because you're totally desperate-so you
sell your eyes, or your kidney, something that can be taken out without
killing you. That goes on, and it's been going on for a long time.
Well, you know, that's a background, and against that background these
stories, which have been rampant, are believable-and they are in fact believed. And it's not just by peasants in the highlands: the chief official in the

148

Understanding Power

Salvadoran government in charge of children [Victoria de Aviles], the
"Procurator for the Defense of Children," she's called, recently stated that
children in El Salvador are being kidnapped for adoption, crime, and organ
transplants. Well, I don't know if that's true or not, but it's not an authority
you just dismiss. In Brazil too there's been a lot of testimony about these
things from very respectable sources: church sources, medical
investigators, legal sources, and others.27
Now, it's interesting: I didn't see the Barbara Walters program you mentioned, but I've read the State Department reports on which she probably
based her stuff-and they're very selective in their coverage. They say, "Oh,
it's all nonsense and lies, and it was all started by the Communists," and
they trace it back to sort of Communist sources-which doubtless picked it
up, but they are not the sources. The State Department carefully excluded
all the other sources, like the church sources, the government sources, the
mainstream legal investigators, the human rights groups-they didn't mention them, they just said, "Yeah, the stories were picked up by the Russian
propaganda apparatus back in the bad old days." But that's not where it
comes from. Like I say, the Russians couldn't start these stories in the
Boston suburbs-and there's a reason why they couldn't start them in the
Boston suburbs and somebody could start them in Guatemala. And the reason is, there's a background in Guatemala against which these things are not
implausible-which is not to say these women are being correctly charged;
undoubtedly they're not, these women are just women who happened to be
in Guatemala. But the point is, that background makes it easy for people
there to be frightened, and in that sort of context it's quite understandable
how these attacks can have happened.
The Real Crime of Cuba
WOMAN: Mr. Chomsky, I'm wondering, how do you explain our
embargo on Cuba-why is it still going on, and can you talk a bit about the
policies that have been behind it over the years?
Well, Cuba is a country the United States has considered that it owns
ever since the 1820s. In fact, one of the earliest parts of U.S. foreign relations history was the decision by Thomas Jefferson, John Quincy Adams
and others to try to annex Cuba. At the time the British navy was in the
way, and they were a real deterrent, so the plan, in Adams's words, was to
wait until Cuba falls into our hands like a ripe fruit, by the laws of political
gravitation.28 Well, finally it did, and the U.S. ran it-with the usual effectsall the way up until 1959.
In January 1959, Cuba had a popular nationalist revolution. We now
know from declassified U.S. government documents that the formal decision to overthrow Castro was made by the American government in March

Chapter Five

149

1960-that's very important, because at that point there were no Russians
around, and Castro was in fact considered anti-Communist by the U.S.
[Castro did not align with the Soviet Union until May 1961, after the U.S.
had severed diplomatic relations with Cuba in January and had sponsored
an invasion attempt in April.] 29 So the reason for deciding to overthrow
the Castro government can't have had anything to do with Cuba being a
Russian outpost in the Cold War-Cuba was just taking an independent path,
which has always been unacceptable to powerful interests in the United
States.
Strafing and sabotage operations began as early as October 1959. Then,
soon after his inauguration in 1961, John F. Kennedy launched a terrorist
campaign against them which is without even remote comparison in the
history of international terrorism [Operation MONGOOSE].3o And in
February 1962, we instituted the embargo-which has had absolutely devastating effects on the Cuban population.
Remember, Cuba's a tiny country right in the U.S. sphere of influence-it's not going to be able to survive on its own for very long against a monster. But over the years, it was able to survive-barely-thanks to Soviet
support: the Soviet Union was the one place Cuba could turn to to try to resist the United States, and the Soviets did provide them with sort of a margin for survival. And we should be realistic about what happened there:
many important and impressive things have been achieved, but it's also
been pretty tyrannical, so there's been an upside and a downside. However,
the country certainly was succeeding in terms that are meaningful to other
populations in the region-I mean, just compare Cuba with Haiti or the
Dominican Republic right next door, or with any other place in Latin
America which the United States has controlled: the difference is obvious,
and that's exactly what the United States has always been concerned about.
Look, the real crime of Cuba was never the repression, which, whatever
you think about it, doesn't even come close to the kind of repression we
have traditionally supported, and in fact implemented, in nearby countries:
not even close. The real crime of Cuba was the successes, in terms of things
like health care and feeding people, and the general threat of a "demonstration effect" that follows from that-that is, the threat that people in other
countries might try to do the same things. That's what they call a rotten
apple that might spoil the barrel, or a virus that might infect the region--and
then our whole imperial system begins to fall apart. I mean, for thirty years,
Cuba has been doing things which are simply intolerable-such as sending
tens of thousands of doctors to support suffering people around the Third
World, or developing biotechnology in a poor country with no options, or
having health services roughly at the level of the advanced countries and
way out of line with the rest of Latin America.31 These things are not
tolerable to American power-they'd be intolerable anywhere in the Third
World, and they're multiply intolerable in a country which is expected to be
a U.S. colony. That's Cuba's real crime.32

150

Understanding Power

In fact, when the Soviet Empire was disintegrating and the supposed Soviet threat in Cuba had evaporated beyond the point that anyone could
possibly take it seriously, an interesting event took place, though nobody in
the u.S. media seemed to notice it. For the last thirty years the story had always been, "We have to defend ourselves against Cuba because it's an outpost of the Russians." Okay, all of a sudden the Russians weren't there
anymore-so what happens? All of a sudden it turned out that we really had
Cuba under an embargo because of our love for democracy and human
rights, not because they're an outpost of Communism about to destroy usnow it turns out that's why we have to keep torturing them-and nobody in
the American press even questions this development. The propaganda
system didn't skip a beat: check back and try to find anybody who even
noticed this little curiosity.
Then in 1992, a liberal Democrat, Robert Torricelli, pushed a bill
through Congress called the Cuban Democracy Act, which made the embargo still tighter-it forbids foreign-based US. subsidiaries from trading
with Cuba, it allows seizure of cargo from foreign ships that trade with
Cuba if they enter u.S. waters, and so on. In fact, this proposal by the liberal
Democrat Torricelli was so obviously in conflict with international law that
George Bush himself even vetoed it-until he was out-flanked from the right
during the Presidential campaign by Bill Clinton, and finally agreed to
accept it. Well, the so-called "Cuban Democracy Act" was immediately denounced by I think every major US. ally. At the UN., the entire world condemned it, with the exception of two countries-the United States and Israel;
the New York Times apparently never discovered that fact. The preceding
year, there had been a U.N. vote on the embargo in which the United States
managed to get three votes for its side-itself, Israel, and Romania. But
Romania apparently dropped off this year.
But the U.S. makes its own rules-we don't care what happens at the UN.,
or what international law requires. As our UN. ambassador, Madeleine
Albright, put it in a debate: "if possible we will act multilaterally, if
necessary we will act unilaterally"-violently, she meant.33 And that's the
way it goes when you're the chief Mafia Don: if you can get support from
others, fine, otherwise you just do it yourself-because you don't follow any
rules. Well, that's us, and the Cuba case illustrates it about as well as you
could.
The enhanced embargo has been quite effective: about 90 percent of the
aid and trade it's cut off has been food and medicine-and that's had the
predictable consequences. In fact, there have been several articles in
leading medical journals recently which describe some of the effects: the
health system, which was extremely good, is collapsing; there's a
tremendous shortage of medicines; malnutrition is increasing; rare diseases
that haven't been seen since Japanese prison camps in the Second World
War are reappearing; infant mortality is going up; general health conditions
are going down.34 In other words, it's working fine-we're "enhancing
democracy." Maybe

Chapter Five
151
we'll ultimately make them as well off as Haiti or Nicaragua, or one of
these other countries we've been taking care of all these years.
I mean, putting sanctions on a country in general is a very questionable
operation-particularly when those sanctions are not being supported by the
population that's supposedly being helped. But this embargo is a particularly brutal one, a really major crime in my opinion. And there's a lot that
can be done to stop it, if enough people in the United States actually get together and start doing something about it. In fact, by now even sectors of
the U.S. business community are beginning to have second thoughts about
the embargo-they're getting a little concerned that they might be cut out of
potentially lucrative business operations if the other rich countries of the
world stop obeying our rules and just begin violating it. 35 So there's a lot of
room for change on this issue-it's certainly something that ought to be
pressed very strongly right now.
Panama and Popular Invasions
WOMAN: Noam, I'm wondering how you explain the very high popular
approval ratings in the United States for the government's attacks on
Grenada, Libya, Panama and so on. You often talk about the population
becoming more dissident-but in the polls after the Panama invasion, about
80 percent of the American people said that they supported it. My
Congressman told us the results ofa poll he sent out-81 percent of 23,000
respondents to the question "Do you support the Panama invasion?" said
yes, they did support it.
Well, I think there's been approval mostly because the interventions you
mentioned were all quick and successful. I mean, if you can do something
where you have an overwhelming advantage, the other side can't fight back,
you can't lose, you'll win in a couple days and then people can just forget
about it, sure, you'll get a high approval rating. That's just standard
jingoism-but I do not think that kind of support can be sustained for very
long the way it could a couple decades ago.
The approval ratings are also high because people don't get any information about what really happens in these operations. For instance, I don't
think anybody here actually knows what happened in Panama. After the
first couple days of the invasion, the news coverage in the U.S. just
stopped. So there were big round-ups of union leaders, the political
opposition was all rounded up and jailed, and so on and so forth-but none
of that stuff was even reported in the United States.36 Or for example, when
Quayle [American Vice-President] went down to Panama in December
1989, if you watched the news coverage on television all you saw was
everybody cheering-but if you looked carefully, you'd have noticed that
everybody in the crowd was white. In fact, the New York Times claimed
that Quayle had not

152

Understanding Power

even gone to the black neighborhood in Panama City, El Chorrillo, at all on
his trip-but that was a flat-out lie.3? He did go, the motorcade went through
there, and there was an accurate Associated Press report about it by a good
journalist, Rita Beamish. She said that in the church Quayle went to where
all the television crews were, everybody was cheering, but they were all
rich white folk. She said that as the motorcade went by in the black
neighborhood, people were silent, stolid, looking out the windows of what
was left of their homes, no clapping, no nothing.38 Okay, so that story didn't
appear in the New York Times, what appeared was "We're heroes in
Panama."
Or another thing nobody here knows is that every year since the U.S. invasion-as the Panamanians themselves call it-Panama commemorates it
with a national day of mourning. Nobody here knows that, obviously, because the press doesn't report it.39 I mean, the government George Bush installed in Panama itself described the country as "a country under military
occupation." 40 There's a group of eight Latin American democracies
called the "Group of Eight," and Panama was expelled from it in March
1990, because, as they pointed out, a country under military occupation
cannot possibly be considered "democratic." 41 Well, none of this has
appeared in the American press either.
And if you just look at how the U.S. media presented the reasons for the
invasion at the time, it becomes even more obvious why people in the
United States generally supported it. What were supposed to be the reasons
for invading Panama and getting rid of Noriega?
MAN: Drug trafficking.
Drug trafficking? Noriega was much more of a drug trafficker in 1985
than in 1989-why didn't we have to go and invade Panama and get rid of
him in 1985? I mean, if we actually had newspapers in the United States,
which we don't, the first thing they would have asked is, "Why did we have
to get rid of Noriega in 1989, but not in 1985?" Well, take a look: what was
the difference between 1989 and 1985?
MAN: He was on the C.I.A. payroll in '85.
Yeah, he was on the payroll-he was our thug in 1985, so therefore we
didn't have to get rid of him. But in the intervening years he was getting too
independent, too big for his britches: he wasn't following orders, he was
supporting the Contadora treaty [a plan for peace in Central America], and
other bad stuff like that.42 Well, the United States doesn't want anything like
that in its domains, so at that point we had to get rid of him. But again, none
of this was presented in the U.S. media at the time of these polls--what was
presented was: he's the narco-trafficker that's destroying the United States,
he's getting your kid hooked on cocaine. Alright, with that

Chapter Five

153

kind of media presentation, it's not surprising that 80 percent of the population would want us to invade Panama and throw him in jail. So frankly, I
would interpret the poll results you mention quite differently.
In fact, there are still other things which go into explaining them, I think.
For example, take George McGovern [1972 Presidential candidate who
campaigned on an anti-war platform]. George McGovern did not support
the invasion of Panama-in fact, about two months afterwards he wrote an
Op-Ed piece in the Washington Post saying he had opposed it from the very
moment Bush did it. But he also said that he had refrained from saying so
at
the time.43 So if he'd been asked about it in a poll, he probably would have
answered that he did support the invasion. And the reason is, if you're a redblooded patriotic American, then when the government is conducting a
violent act you're supposed to rally around the flag. That's part of our
brainwashing, you know-to have that concept of patriotism drilled into
our heads. And people really do feel it, even people like George McGovern,
somebody who surely would have been in the 20 percent, but if he'd been
polled about it would have voted with the 80 percent. We don't want to be
"anti-American," to use the standard term-which in itself is a pretty startling
propaganda triumph, actually. Like, go to Italy and try using the word "antiItalianism," call somebody there "anti-Italian" and just see what happensthey'd crack up in ridicule. But here those totalitarian values
really do mean something to people, because there have been very extensive
and systematic efforts to control the population in ways like that, and they
have been highly successful. I mean, there's a huge public relations industry
in the United States, and it doesn't spend billions of dollars a year for nothing, you know.44 So you really have to be a little bit more careful and nuanced when you interpret these kinds of poll results, in my view.
And the fact is, in the 1980s and Nineties, U.S. interventions in the Third
World have been of quite a different character than ever before in the past.
Direct U.S. military interventions in the last twenty years have been guided
by a very simple principle, which was not true before in our history: never
attack anybody who can fight back-and that's not accidental. So take a look
at who we attacked directly in the 1980s. Grenada: a hundred thousand
people, the nutmeg capital of the world, defended by 43 Cuban paramilitaries and a couple Grenadan militiamen. Libya: it's totally defenseless,
you can bomb them, you can knock their ships out of the water, you can do
anything you want to them, because there's no way for them to react. Or
look at Panama: Panama was already under U.S. military occupation at the
time of the invasion-literally. I mean, American forces were able to try dry
runs on their targets a couple days before the "invasion" to make sure
everything would go smoothly, and the whole thing was over and done with
in a day or two.45 Well, as long as you can carry out an attack against a
completely defenseless target like that, sure, then you can get up and strut
around with manly poses and talk about how brave you are. But you don't
ever attack anybody who can fight back anymore-if there's anybody who

154

Understanding Power

can fight back, you've got to resort to other methods: subversion, mercenary states, things like that.
Okay, that's just a major shift in U.S. policy. It's not a constraint that
Kennedy and Johnson labored under-when they wanted to attack some
country, they just attacked it, didn't give it a second thought. Johnson sent
23,000 U.S. Marines to invade and wreck the Dominican Republic in 1965where people did fight back, incidentally. And the two of them sent a huge
expeditionary force of over half a million men to invade Vietnam, which
went on for years and years without any popular response here. Well, that's
the sign of a big change-and I think the change is that the American
population simply won't tolerate the traditional kind of intervention any
longer, they'll only accept the kind of invasion we carried out in Panama.46
That's my understanding of the political scene, at least.
Muslims and U.S. Foreign Policy
MAN: Dr. Chomsky, I have a question. Would you agree that in this
attack on the less powerful people of the world generally, there is also a
secret, vicious war being waged on the Muslim people? And what do you
think is in store for Muslims in general in the world?
Well, it does happen to be the case that plenty of Muslims have been getting it in the neck from the United States-but that's not because they're
Muslims, it's because they're not sufficiently under control. There are plenty
of white Christian people who are also getting it in the neck. In the 1980s,
the United States fought a vicious war in Central America primarily against
the Catholic Church-and that means European priests, not just priests from
indigenous origins-because the Church had started working for what they
called "the preferential option for the poor," therefore they had to go.47 In
fact, when Americas Watch [a human rights organization focused on North
and South America] did their wrap-up study on the 1980s, they pointed out
that it was a decade framed by the murder of the Archbishop in 1980 and
the murder of six Jesuit intellectuals in 1989, both in El Salvador-yeah, that
wasn't accidental.48
See, the Catholic Church became the main target of the U.S. attacks in
Central America because there was a radical and very conscious change in
critically important sectors of the Church (including dominant elements
among the Latin American bishops) who recognized that for hundreds of
years it had been a Church of the rich and the oppressors, which was telling
the poor, "This is your fate, accept it." And so they decided to finally become a Church in part devoted to the liberation of the poor-and they immediately fell under attack.
So you're right, it is true that the U.S. is attacking a substantial part of the
world that happens to be Muslim, but we're not attacking it because

Chapter Five

155

they're Muslim-we don't care if they're Martians. The question is, are they
obedient?
This is very easy to prove, actually. For instance, there's a lot of talk in
the u.s. about "Islamic fundamentalism," as if that's some bad thing we're
trying to fight. But the most extreme Islamic fundamentalist state in the
world is Saudi Arabia: are we going after the leaders of Saudi Arabia? No,
they're great guys-they torture and murder and kill and all that stuff, but
they also send the oil profits from their country to the West and not to the
people of the region, so they're just fine.49 Or take non-state agents: I
suppose the most extreme fanatic Islamic fundamentalist in the world is
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar in Afghanistan, who got over a billion dollars of aid
from the United States and Saudi Arabia and is now tearing what's left of
Afghanistan to pieces. Yeah, he's a good guy, he's been fighting on our
side-narco-trafficker, terrorist, all those things, but doing what we wanted.50
On the other hand, if Islamic fundamentalists are organizing clinics in
the slums of Cairo, they're going to have to go, just as the liberation theologians in Latin America who happened to be Basques-you know, blue
eyes, blond hair and so on-had to go. I mean, there is a racist element to
U.S. policy, of course, but the basic motivation is not that, I think. The real
goal is just maintaining obedience-as in Cuba, as in Panama, and so on.
Haiti: Disturbance at an Export Platform
MAN: Mr. Chomsky, Haiti and Jean-Bertrand Aristide [populist Haitian
priest elected president in 1990J have been all over the news in recent
years, and it seems to me our present policies towards Haiti don't quite fit
the overall picture you describe. In that country at least, it does seem that
the United States is trying to institute democracy of some sort-after all, we
ousted the coup leaders [who deposed Aristide in 1991J and restored the
popularly-elected leader to power in 1994. It appears to me your thesis
might be breaking down a little on this one, and I'm interested if you have
an analysis of that: what's been happening in Haiti?
Well, I'll start with the context, and we can see how different things are.
The United States has been supporting the Haitian military and dictators for
two hundred years-it's not a new policy. And for the last twenty or thirty
years, the U.S. has basically been trying to turn Haiti into kind of an export
platform with super-cheap labor and lucrative returns for U.S. investors.
And for a long time it seemed to be working: there was a lot of repression,
the population was under control, American investors were making big
profits, and so on. Then in 1990, something happened which really
surprised the hell out of everyone. There was this free election in Haiti,
which everyone here assumed would be won by the former World

156

Understanding Power

Bank official we were backing [Marc Bazin], who had all the resources,
and foreign support, and so on-but meanwhile something had been going on
in the slums and peasant communities of Haiti that nobody here was paying
any attention to: a lively and vibrant civil society was forming, with big
grassroots organizations, and people getting involved in all kinds of activities. There was in fact a huge amount of popular organizing and activism-but who here was paying any attention? The C.I.A. doesn't look at stuff like
that, certainly American journalists don't. So nobody here knew. Well, all
of a sudden, in December 1990, these grassroots organizations came out of
the woodwork and won the election. Catastrophe.
At that point, the only question for people who know anything about
American history should have been, "how are they going to get rid of this
guy?"-because something like the Aristide victory simply is not tolerable in
our sphere: a populist movement based on grassroots support, and a priest
infected with liberation theology? That won't last. And of course, the U.S.
instantly started to undermine the Aristide government: investment and aid
were cut off, except to the Haitian business community so it could start
forming counter-Aristide forces; the National Endowment for Democracy
went in to try to set up counter-institutions to subvert the new government,
which by an odd accident are exactly the institutions that survived intact
after the 1991 coup, though nobody here happened to notice that little
coincidence; and so on.51
But nevertheless, despite all this, within a couple months of the election
the Aristide regime was in fact proving itself to be very successful-which of
course made it even more dangerous from the perspective of U.S. power. It
was getting support from international lending institutions, because it was
cutting down on bureaucracy; it was finally starting to put the country in
order after decades of corruption and abuses by the U.S.-backed Duvalier
family dictatorship; drug trafficking was being cut back; atrocities were
reduced far below the normal level; the flow of refugees to the U.S.
virtually stopped.52
Okay, September, there's a military coup, and Aristide is overthrown.
Theoretically the United States announced an embargo and sanctions on the
new junta-but that was pure fraud: the Bush administration made it very
clear, instantly, that it was not going to pay any attention to the sanctions
(meaning nobody else in the world had to pay any attention to them either).
Bush established what they called an "exemption" to the embargo-in other
words, about eight hundred U.S.-owned firms were made "exempt" from it.
The New York Times really had to do a little work on that one. They
described this as "fine-tuning" the embargo-you know, to direct it more
exactly against the coup leaders, since we don't want the Haitian people to
suffer, as we've demonstrated so clearly over the years.53 Meanwhile, total
U.S. trade with Haiti stayed not very much below the norm during the
course of this "embargo," and in fact, in 1993 under Bill Clinton it went up
by 50 percent.54 Somehow the free press seemed to miss

Chapter Five

157

this completely. Nobody thought enough to do what I did: give a call to the
Commerce Department and ask for the trade figures; it takes approximately
two minutes, and you discover exactly what happened. But I guess that's
beyond the resources of the press here, because they never managed to find
it out.
Well, as this was all going on, the Haitian generals in effect were being
told: "Look, murder the leaders of the popular organizations, intimidate the
whole population, destroy anyone who looks like they might get in the way
after you're gone. We'll give you a certain amount of time to do it, then
when your job is done, we'll let you know and you can go off to the south
of France and be very nicely treated; and don't worry, you'll have plenty of
money when you retire, you'll be rich and comfortable for the rest of your
lives." And that's exactly what Cédras [the coup leader] and those guys did,
that's precisely what happened-and of course they were given total amnesty
when they finally did agree to step down [after a diplomatic mission by
former u.s. President Jimmy Carter in October 1994].55
Alright, the day before the u.s. troops were sent into Haiti, a big story to
do with this came across the Associated Press news-wires-meaning every
newsroom in the country knew about it. What it said was that a justice Department investigation had just revealed that American oil companies were
supplying oil directly to the Haitian coup leaders in violation of the embargo, which everybody knew, but also with the official authorization of the
u.s. government at the highest level, which not everybody knew. I mean, you
could have guessed as much, but you didn't know for certain that the
administration in Washington was openly permitting American
corporations to support the Haitian junta until this story broke. And what
this justice Department investigation had found was that the Secretary of
the Treasury under Bush essentially had just told the big American oil companies, yeah it's illegal, but don't worry about it, we won't pursue it-and the
same exact thing was going on under Clinton too.
Okay, the following day I did a Nexis [news media database] search on
this, just out of curiosity, and it turns out that that story did in fact appear in
the American press-in something called Platt's Oilgram, a journal for the
oil industry. Somehow they discovered it. It was also in a bunch of local
papers, like the Dayton Ohio Whatever and so on-just because local editors
aren't always sophisticated enough to know the things you're not supposed
to publish. But it never hit the national press, save for a couple lines buried
in the Wall Street Journal somewhere, which didn't give the full picture.56
And remember, this was at precisely the time when everybody in the
country was focusing on Haiti: there were American troops being sent
there, supposedly to throw out the coup leaders, there were thousands of
stories about Haiti and the embargo, but the media completely silenced this
report of the justice Department investigation. And keep in mind, that was
the biggest story of the week-what it said was, there never were any sanc-

158

Understanding Power

tions, never: not under Bush, not under Clinton. Well, that would have
given the whole thing away, of course, so therefore it simply did not appear
in the major American media.
So the American troops moved in, and the generals who led the coup basically were told, "You did your job, now you can go away and be rich and
happy." Aristide was finally allowed to return to office for a few months to
finish out his term-with the popular organizations that had elected him now
massacred. And do you remember Bill Clinton's big speech about this on
T.V. [in September 1994], when he said that President Aristide has shown
what a true democrat he is because he's agreed to step down in early 1996,
when the Haitian constitution says he has to step down? You remember
that? Well, the Haitian constitution didn't say he had to step down in early
1996-Bill Clinton said that. The Haitian constitution says that the president
is supposed to be in office for a term of five years, it doesn't deal with the
question of what happens if three of those five years are spent in forced
exile, while U.S.-trained terrorists have stolen his office and are murdering
the population as he sits in Washington. That's Bill Clinton's interpretation,
it's the United States's interpretation.57 I mean, people who hate democracy
as much as we do will say, "Okay, that counts." But if you actually believe
in democracy, that means that the people who voted for Aristide-which was
the overwhelming majority of the Haitian population-have a right to five
years with him as president. But just try to find anyone in the United States
who even notices the possibility of this. Actually, it has been mentioned in
Canada-but I haven't been able to find a word suggesting it in the United
States, again reflecting just how profound is the contempt for democracy
here.58
So Aristide was allowed in for a few months with his hands tied, and
with a national economic plan being rammed down his throat by the World
Bank, a standard structural adjustment package.59 I mean, it was referred to
in the press as "the program that Aristide is offering the donor nations"offering it with a gun to his head-and it has lots of nice rhetoric around in it
for the benefit of Western journalists. But when you get right down to the
core part of it, what it says is the following.
It says: "The renovated government," meaning Aristide, "must focus its
energies and efforts on civil society," particularly export industries and foreign investors.6o Okay, that's Haitian civil society-foreign investors in New
York City are Haitian civil society, not grassroots organizations in Haiti,
they're not Haitian civil society. And what that means is, under these World
Bank economic conditions, whatever foreign resources do come into Haiti
will have to be used to turn the country back into what we've always
wanted it to be in the first place: an export platform with super-cheap manufacturing labor and agricultural exports to the United States that keep the
peasants there from subsistence farming as the population starves.
So the upshot is, things in Haiti have been returned to 1990 again-but
with one important difference: the popular movements have been deci-

Chapter Five

159

mated. I mean, people in Haiti were extremely happy when the coup leaders
were finally kicked out-and boy, if I'd been living there, I'd have been
happy too: at least there weren't murderers in control torturing and killing
them anymore. But that's basically the choice between water-torture and
electric-torture, really. I guess water-torture's better, or so people say. But
the hope for Haitian democracy is finished, at least for the moment-it'll just
go back to being a u.s. export platform again. Meanwhile, there'll be more
rousing speeches here about our love for democracy and free elections, and
just how far we'll go to uphold our democratic ideals around the world.
Maybe in fifty years they'll even discover the business about the oil.
Texaco and the Spanish Revolution
Incidentally, there's a little historical footnote here, if you're interested.
The oil company that was authorized by the Treasury Department under
Bush and Clinton to ship oil to the Haitian coup leaders happened to be
Texaco. And people of about my age who were attuned to these sorts of
things might remember back to the 1930s, when the Roosevelt administration was trying to undermine the Spanish Republic at the time of the Spanish Revolution in 1936 and '37-you'll remember that Texaco also played a
role.
See, the Western powers were strongly opposed to the Spanish Republican forces at that point during the Spanish Civil War-because the Republican side was aligned with a popular revolution, the anarcho-syndicalist
revolution that was breaking out in Spain, and there was a danger that that
revolution might take root and spread to other countries. After the anarchosyndicalist organizations were put down by force, the Western powers
didn't care so much anymore [anarcho-syndicalism is a sort of non-Leninist
or libertarian socialism]. But while the revolution was still going on in
Spain and the Republican forces were at war with General Franco and his
Fascist army-who were being actively supported by Hitler and Mussolini,
remember-the Western countries and Stalinist Russia all wanted to see the
Republican forces just gotten rid of. And one of the ways in which the Roosevelt administration helped to see that they were gotten rid of was through
what was called the "Neutrality Act"-you know, we're going to be neutral,
we're not going to send any support to either the Republican side or the
Fascist side, we're just going to let them fight their own war.61 Except the
"Neutrality Act" was only 50 percent applied in this case.
You see, the Fascists were getting all the guns they needed from Germany, but they didn't have enough oil. So therefore the Texaco Oil Company-which happened to be run by an outright Nazi at the time [Captain
Thorkild Rieber], something that wasn't so unusual in those days, actuallysimply terminated its existing oil contracts with the Spanish Republic and
redirected its tankers in mid-ocean to start sending the Fascists the oil

160

Understanding Power

they needed, in July 1936.62 It was all totally illegal, of course, but the Roosevelt administration never pushed the issue.
And again, the entire American press at the time was never able to discover it-except the small left-wing press: somehow they were able to find
out about it. So if you read the small left-wing press in the United States
back in 1937, they were reporting this all the time, but the big American
newspapers just have never had the resources to find out about things like
this, so they never said a word.63 I mean, years later people writing diplomatic history sort of mention these facts in the margins-but at the time there
was nothing in the mainstream.64 And that's exactly what we just saw in
Haiti: the American press would not tell people that the U.S. was actively
undermining the sanctions, that there never were any sanctions, and that the
U.S. was simply trying to get back the old pre-Aristide business climate
once again-which was pretty much achieved.
Averting Democracy in Italy
MAN: Noam, since you mentioned the U.S. opposing popular democracy
and supporting fascist-type structures in Spain and Haiti-I just want to
point out that that also happened in Italy, France, Greece, and other allied
Western countries after World War II. I mean, there's a big history of the
U.S. undermining democracy and supporting fascist elements in the past
half century or so, even in the rich European societies.
That's right-in fact, that was the first major post-war operation by the
United States: to destroy the anti-fascist resistance all over the world and
restore more or less fascist structures to power, and also many Fascist collaborators. That happened everywhere, actually: from European countries
like Italy and France and Greece, to places like Korea and Thailand. It's the
first chapter of post-war history, really-how we broke up the Italian unions,
and the French unions, and the Japanese unions, and avoided the very real
threat of popular democracy that had arisen around the world by the end of
World War 11.65
The first big American intervention was in Italy in 1948, and the point
was to disrupt the Italian election-and it was a huge operation. See, U.S.
planners were afraid there was going to be a democratic election in Italy
which would result in a victory for the Italian anti-fascist movement. That
prospect had to be avoided for the same reason it always has to be avoided:
powerful interests in the United States do not want people with the wrong
sort of priorities in charge of any government. And in the case of Italy,
there was a major effort to prevent the popular-democratic forces that had
comprised the anti-fascist resistance from winning the election after the
war.66 In fact, U.S. opposition to Italian democracy reached the point of
almost sponsoring a military coup around the late 1960s, just to keep the
Commu-

Chapter Five

161

nists (meaning the working-class parties) out of the government.67 And it's
probable that when the rest of the internal U.S. records are declassified,
we'll find that Italy was actually the major target of C.I.A. operations in the
world for years after that-that seems to be the case up until around 1975,
when the declassified record sort of runs dry.68
It was the same story in France-and the same throughout Europe. In fact,
if you look back, the main reason for the partition of Germany into Eastern
and Western countries-which was Western-initiated, remember--was put
rather nicely by George Kennan [of the U.S. State Department], who was
one of the main architects of the post-war world. Back in 1946, he said: we
have to "wall off" Western Germany (nice phrase) from the Eastern Zone,
because of the danger that a German Communist movement might developwhich would just be too powerful; Germany's an important, powerful
country, you know, and since the world was kind of social-democratic at
that time, a unified socialist movement in a place like Germany or Japan
would have been totally intolerable. So therefore we had to wall off
Western Germany from the Eastern Zone in order to prevent that possibility
from taking place.69
In Italy, it was an especially serious problem-because the anti-fascist resistance there was huge, and it was extremely popular and prestigious. See,
France has a much better propaganda system than Italy, so we know a lot
more about the French resistance than the Italian resistance. But the fact of
the matter is the Italian resistance was way more significant than the French
resistance-I mean, the people who were involved in the French resistance
were very courageous and honorable, but it was a very small sector of the
society: France as a whole was mostly collaborationist during the Nazi occupation.70 But Italy was quite different: the Italian resistance was so significant that it basically liberated Northern Italy, and it was holding down
maybe six or seven German divisions, and the Italian working-class part of
it was very organized, and had widespread support in the population. In
fact, when the American and British armies made it up to Northern Italy,
they had to throw out a government that had already been established by the
Italian resistance in the region, and they had to dismantle various steps
towards workers' control over industry that were being set up. And what
they did was to restore the old industrial owners, on the grounds that removal of these Fascist collaborators had been "arbitrary dismissal" of legitimate owners-that's the term that was used.71 And then we also
undermined the democratic processes, because it was obvious that the resistance and not the discredited conservative order was going to win the upcoming elections. So there was a threat of real democracy breaking out in
Italy-what's technically referred to by the U.S. government as "Communism"-and as usual, that had to be stopped.
Well, as you say, the same thing also happened elsewhere at the timeand
in other countries it was much more violent, actually. So to destroy the antiNazi resistance in Greece and restore the Nazi collaborators to power

162

Understanding Power

there, it took a war in which maybe 160,000 people were killed and
800,000 became refugees-the country still hasn't recovered from it.72 In
Korea, it meant killing 100,000 people in the late 1940s, before what we
call the "Korean War" even started.73 But in Italy it was enough just to carry
out subversion-and the United States took that very seriously. So we funded
ultra-right Masonic Lodges and terrorist paramilitary groups in Italy, the
Fascist police and strikebreakers were brought back, we withheld food, we
made sure their economy couldn't function.74 In fact, the first National
Security Council Memorandum, N.S.C. 1, is about Italy and the Italian
elections. And what it says is that if the Communists come to power in the
election through legitimate democratic means, the United States must
declare a national emergency: the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean should
be put on alert, the United States should start subversive activities in Italy
to overthrow the Italian government, and we should begin contingency
planning for direct military intervention-that's if the resistance wins a legitimate democratic election.75
And this was not taken as a joke, not at all-in fact, there were people at
the top levels of the U.S. government who took even more extreme positions than that. For instance, George Kennan again, who's considered a
great humanist, thought that we ought to invade Italy even before the election and not allow anything like that to happen in the first place-but he was
kind of held down by other people who said, look, we can probably buy off
the election by the threat of starvation and extensive terrorism and
subversion, which in the end turned out to be correct.76
And these sorts of policies were still being followed by the United States
right into the 1970s, when the declassified records dry up. The end of the
documentation that we have at this point is around 1975-that's when the
House Pike Committee Report released a lot of information about U.S. subversive activities-and who knows whether it went on after that.77 Most of
the literature about this is in Italian, but there's some in English-for example, Ed Herman and Frank Brodhead have a good book on the so-called
"plot to kill the Pope" disinformation story, which includes an interesting
discussion of some of the more recent material on Italy-and there are others.78 And as I say, the same sorts of policies also were carried out in
France, Germany, Japan, and so on.
Actually, the U.S. also reconstructed the Mafia as part of this whole effort to split the European labor movement after the war. I mean, the Mafia
had mostly been wiped out by the Fascists-Fascists tend to run a pretty tight
ship, they don't like competition. So Hitler and Mussolini had essentially
wiped out the Mafia, and as the American liberating armies moved into
Sicily and then through Southern Italy and into France, they reconstituted it
as a tool to break strikes. See, the U.S. needed goons to break strikers'
knees on the waterfront and that kind of thing, and where are you going to
find guys like that? Well, the answer was, in the Mafia. So in France, the
C.I.A.-working together with the leadership of the American

Chapter Five

163

labor movement, incidentally-resurrected the Corsican Mafia. And the
Mafia don't just do it for fun, you know-I mean, maybe they also enjoy it,
but they want a payoff. And as kind of a quid pro quo for smashing up the
French labor movement, they were allowed to reconstitute the heroin trade,
which had been reduced to virtually zero under the Fascists-that's the origin
of the famous "French Connection," the main source of the post-war heroin
racket.79
And there were also covert activities in this period involving the
Vatican, the U.S. State Department, and British and American intelligence
to save and employ many of the worst Nazi war criminals, and use them in
exactly the same sorts of operations the Nazis used them for, against the
popular resistance forces in the West and then in Eastern Europe. For
example, the guy who invented the gas chambers, Walter Rauff, was
secreted off to work on counterinsurgency in Chile. The head of Nazi
intelligence on the Eastern Front, Reinhard Gehlen, joined American
intelligence doing the same kind of work for us in Eastern Europe. The
"Butcher of Lyon," Klaus Barbie, worked for the Americans spying on the
French until finally they had to move him out through the Vatican-run
"ratline" to Latin America, where then he finished out his career.80 That was
another part of the whole postwar effort of the United States to destroy the
prospects for independent democracy-and certainly it's something which
took place.
P.R. in Somalia
MAN: Professor Chomsky, in light of all this I'm wondering, do you think
there has ever been such a thing as a humanitarian intervention by the
U.S.? Take what we were supposed to have been doing in Somalia, for
example: that was framed as a humanitarian action here-do you think that
was all image, or was there also some reality to it too?
Well, states are not moral agents; they are vehicles of power, which
operate in the interests of the particular internal power structures of their
societies. So anybody who intervenes in another country, except maybe
Luxembourg or something, is going to be intervening for their own purposes-that's always been true in history. And the Somalia operation, to take
the case you mention, certainly was not humanitarian.
I mean, the U.S. waited very carefully until the famine there was pretty
much over and the major international aid organizations, like the Red Cross
and Save the Children and so on, were getting about eighty percent of their
aid into the country (using Somalis to do most of the work, it turns out)
before it decided to move in.81 So if the U.S. government had had any
humanitarian feelings with regard to Somalia, it had plenty of time to show
it-in fact, it could have shown it from 1978 through 1990, when the U.S.
was the chief supporter of Siad Barre, the Somali warlord who destroyed

164

Understanding Power

the country and killed maybe fifty or sixty thousand people with U.S. assistance, long before the famine.82 But when our favorite tyrant collapsed, the
"'1 u.s. pulled out, a civil war then erupted, there was mass starvation-and
the u.s. did nothing. When the famine and fighting were at their peak, in the
first half of 1992, the u.s. still did nothing.
By around the time of the November 1992 Presidential election here, it
was clear that Somalia could provide some good photo op's--if we send
thirty thousand Marines in when the famine is declining and the fighting is
calming down, we'll get really nice shots of Marine colonels handing out
cookies to starving children; that'll look good, it'll be a real shot in the arm
for the Pentagon budget. And in fact, it was even described that way by
people like Colin Powell [then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff] and
others-they were saying, well, you know, it'll look good for the Pentagon.83
Of course, it should have been obvious to them that pretty soon it was
going to turn into a nightmare: when you put a foreign military force into a
country, it won't be long before they're fighting the local population. That's
almost automatic, even if the population had welcomed them. Take
Northern Ireland, for example: the British were called in by the Catholic
population [in August 1969]; a couple months later, they were murdering
the Catholic population.84 That's what foreign armies are like, the dynamics
are clear-and in the case of Somalia, it was only a question of time before 1,_
the shooting started.85
MAN: Then you were opposed to the whole u.s. operation?
By that point I was sort of, like, neutral. I mean, you couldn't really tell
whether it would cause more good than harm, though it was certainly not a
humanitarian intervention. But the more important point is, there was always
a
much
better
alternative.
Look: the U.S. should have given aid right away, and the U.N.
should have remained there throughout the famine. But by the time you got
to mid) 1992, things were already beginning to improve--and they were
beginning to improve partly under the leadership of a U.N. negotiator, an
Algerian named Mohammed Sahnoun, who was doing extremely well by
all accounts: he was starting to bring local groups together, he had a lot of
respect from all sides in the conflict, he was working with traditional elders
and women's groups and so on. And they were starting to rehabilitate Somalian society, and to address some of its problems-he was just extremely
effective by the testimony of all the international aid agencies, and a lot of
others. But he was thrown out, because he publicly opposed the incompetence and corruption of the U.N. operation. They simply got rid of him--and
that means the U.S. supported it.86
So you see, you really didn't need an intervention at that time: the best
thing would have been just to continue giving support to Sahnoun and oth-

Chapter Five

165

ers like him, who were trying to bring together the various parts of Somalian civil society. I mean, that's the way you've got to do it, or else there
isn't really going to be any lasting progress-you have to help the civil
society reconstruct itself, because they're the only ones who can ultimately
solve their own problems. And Sahnoun and others were doing that, so it
would have been very efficient just to help them continue doing it. But of
course, that was never a thought here: you don't get any P.R. for the
Pentagon that way.
So you can ask whether in the end the Somalis benefited or were harmed
by what we did, and I'm not certain what the answer is. But whatever
happened, they were secondary: they were just props for photo
opportunities. Maybe they were helped by it-I hope so-but if so it was purely
incidental.
The Gulf War
MAN: Probably the major U.S. foreign policy event of recent years was the
Gulf War. What would you say was the media's contribution to that? As I
remember it, the coverage in the United States was all "rah-rah" support
as we bombed Iraq.
It's true there was a lot of that-but in my view, the much more significant
period for reviewing the media on the Gulf War is not what people usually
concentrate on, and what the media themselves are willing to talk about:
that is, the six weeks of the actual bombing January 16 to February 27,
1991], when the constraints on reporting were naturally pretty tight and
there was the predictable patriotic jingoism. The most important period was
between August 1990 and January 1991-the period when a decision had to
be made about how to respond to Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait [on
August 2,1990].
The decision to use violence is always a very serious one. In a
functioning democratic society-I don't mean one with democratic forms, but
I stress "functioning"-that decision would only be taken after a lot of public
discussion of the issues, and consideration of the alternatives, and weighing
of the consequences. Then, after appropriate public debate, maybe a
decision would be made to resort to violence. Well, that never happened in
the case of the Gulf War-and it was the fault of the American media that it
never happened.
Look: the fundamental question throughout the pre-war period was
whether the U.S. would pursue the peaceful means that were available--and
which are in fact required to be pursued by international law-for a
diplomatic settlement and negotiated Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, or
whether on the other hand we would undercut any possibility for a diplomatic settlement, and move straight to the arena of violence.87 Well, we
don't know whether diplomatic means actually were available in this case,

166

Understanding Power

but we don't know that for a very simple reason: Iraq put them on the table,
but they were rejected, and they were rejected at once by the Bush administration starting in mid-August 1990, and running right through to the start
of the bombing in mid-January.88
What was the media's role in this? Well, they suppressed the story, basically. I mean, you'd have to be a real media addict to know that Iraq had
made proposals in mid-August 1990 that frightened the State Department
enough so that they were worried they would have to try to-as the New
York Times correspondent put it in a moment of carelessness-"reject the
diplomatic track." 89 And that suppression continued right up until the
bombing started in January 1991: there were diplomatic offers on the table,
whether serious or not we don't know, for Iraqi withdrawal in the context of
a conference on regional issues, and other things which certainly sounded
negotiable-and indeed were regarded by U.S. Middle East specialists in the
government as, as they put it, "serious" and "negotiable" proposals.90 But
barely anybody knew about this. In Europe, I think virtually no one knew.
In the United States, you could have known it if you read the one
newspaper in the country that actually followed the story, namely Newsday
in Long Island. And Newsday followed it in part I suspect-although I can't
prove this-because they were being leaked material from somebody in the
government who was trying to smoke out the New York Times, which had
failed to publish it. See, Newsday is a very funny publication to see
information being leaked to-it's good, but it's a small suburban newspaper.
However, it does happen to be on sale at every newsstand in New York, so
when their whole front page has a big headline saying "Iraq Sent Pullout
Deal to U.S.," the New York Times can't pretend not to see it, and they'll
have to publish some sort of back-page acknowledgment and dismissal the
next day-which is indeed what happened.91
But the point is, by refusing to allow the discussion and debate-and even
the information-that would be the basis for sane decision-making about the
need for war in a democratic society, the media set the stage for what
turned out to be, predictably, a very destructive and murderous conflict.
People don't want a war unless you absolutely have to have one, but the
media would not present the possibility that there were alternatives-so
therefore we went to war very much in the manner of a totalitarian society.
92
That's really the main point about the media and the Gulf War, in my
View.
Of course, it didn't stop there-there were also plenty of the things that
you referred to as well. So before and during the war, the Bush administration had to build up an image in people's minds of Iraq as a monstrous military superpower, in order to mobilize enough popular hysteria so that
people here would go along with their policies. And again, the media did
their job 100 percent. So I don't know how well you remember what was
going on around the country back then, but people were literally quaking in
their boots about the extraordinary might of Iraq-it was a superpower

Chapter Five

167

with artillery we'd never dreamt of, all this kind of stuff.93 I mean, this was
a defenseless Third World country that was so weak it had been unable to
defeat post-revolutionary Iran in eight years of warfare [from 1980 to '88]and that was with the support of the United States, the Soviet Union, all of
Europe, the Arab oil countries: not an inconsiderable segment of world
power. Yet with all those allies, Iraq had been unable to defeat postrevolutionary Iran, which had killed off its own officers' corps and barely
had an army left: all of a sudden this was the superpower that was going to
conquer the world? You really had to be a deeply brainwashed Western intellectual even to look at this image-a defenseless Third World country
threatening the two most advanced military forces in the world, the United
States and Britain-and not completely collapse in ridicule. But as you recall, that's what all of them were saying-and people here really believed it.
In fact, during the Gulf War I dropped my scheduled speaking engagements and accepted invitations to talk in the most reactionary parts of the
country I could find-just because I was curious what I'd see. So I went to
some place in Georgia which is surrounded by military bases; I went to
Lehigh, Pennsylvania, a jingoist working-class town; to some conservative
towns in Massachusetts, to Appalachia, places like that. And everywhere I
went, people were terrified out of their wits. Sometimes it was pretty
amazing.
For instance, there's a college in northern California called Chico State,
which is where guys like Reagan and Shultz [Reagan's Secretary of State]
send their kids so they won't be infected by "lefties" at Berkeley. The place
is right in the middle of four hundred miles of cornfields, or whatever it is
they grow out there, a million miles from nowhere, and when you fly in you
land at an airport that's about half the size of a house. Well, when I landed
there, a student and a faculty member who were like the two local radicals
at the school came out to meet me. And as we were walking to the car, I noticed we had to go a pretty long distance, because the airport was all surrounded with yellow police tape. So I asked these guys, "What's going on,
are they rebuilding the landing strip or something?" You know what they
said? "No, that's to protect the airport from Arab terrorists." I said, "Arab
terrorists in northern California?" But they thought so. And when I got into
the town, everybody was walking around in army fatigues and wearing yellow ribbons, saying "If Saddam comes, we're going to fight to the death,"
and so on.
And in a sense, people really believed it. I should say, though, that in
everyone of these towns I went to, the propaganda line was so thin that as
soon as you started discussing the situation and you made a few jokes about
what the reality was, the whole thing just totally collapsed, and by the end
of the talk you'd get a huge standing ovation. Friends of mine who "spoke
around the country at the time found exactly the same thing, incidentallyAlexander Cockburn, for instance. But that was the image of Iraq that the
media presented right on cue-and with the help of that prop-

168

Understanding Power

aganda cover, Bush was able to carry out his bombardment for six weeks,
and kill a few hundred thousand people, and leave Iraq in total ruins, and
put
on
a
huge
show
of
force
and
violence. 94
And notice that contrary to the line that's constantly presented
about what the Gulf War was fought for, in reality it had nothing to do with
not liking Saddam Hussein-as can very easily be demonstrated. So just take
a look at what happened right after the U.S. bombardment ended. A week
after the war, Saddam Hussein turned to crushing the Shiite population in
the south of Iraq and the Kurdish population in the north: what did the
United States do? It watched. In fact, rebelling Iraqi generals pleaded with
the United States to let them use captured Iraqi equipment to try to overthrow Saddam Hussein. The U.S. refused. Saudi Arabia, our leading ally in
the region, approached the United States with a plan to support the rebel
general Is in their attempt to overthrow Saddam after the war; the Bush administration blocked the plan, and it was immediately dropped.95
Furthermore, there was no secret about the American decision to leave
Saddam Hussein in power after the Gulf War-and there was even a reason
given for it. The reason was explained by a spokesman for the State Department at the New York Times, Thomas Friedman. What he said was, it is
necessary that Saddam Hussein remain in control of Iraq for what's called
"stability." He said: "The best of all worlds" would be "an ironfisted Iraqi
junta" that would rule Iraq the way Saddam Hussein did--much to the
approval of Turkey and Saudi Arabia, and of course the boss in
Washington. But since they couldn't get the "best of all worlds" right then,
they were going to have to settle for second best-namely, Saddam Hussein
himself, so he could rule Iraq, as Friedman put it, with an "iron fist." 96
Therefore the United States did nothing to prevent Saddam from massacring the Shiite rebels as U.S. troops were stationed all over the region-and that's been going on ever since, with his attack on the marsh dwellers
and others. And the only reason why any barriers were ever put up to his attack on the Kurds in the north was that a huge international outcry developed in the West, as people here watched Iraqi forces massacring people
who this time happened to have blue eyes and Western features-it was just
pure racism that no similar public response ever developed to his assault on
the Shiites.
But sure, Saddam Hussein stayed in power after the war-and he was
supported by George Bush again, just like before the war. Meanwhile, the
real victim of the bombing and the U.S.-imposed embargo has been the
general population of Iraq. In fact, literally hundreds of thousands of
children have died in Iraq since the end of the war, just as a result of
American insistence on maintaining sanctions-and by now the United States
and England are alone at the U.N. Security Council in insisting that the
sanctions against Iraq still remain in effect, even though the formal U.N.
conditions for them have by this point been satisfied.97 But again, that's
another story you won't see pursued very far in the U.S. press.

Chapter Five

169

Also, it's widely agreed that Saddam Hussein's hold on power has not
been weakened by all of this-it's actually been strengthened. For instance,
there was an article not too long ago in Foreign Affairs, the main foreign
policy journal, which pointed out that Saddam Hussein now can at least
appeal to nationalism in the Iraqi population to tighten his rule-while the
sanctions have turned what was previously a relatively wealthy country into
a deeply impoverished one, with literally more than a million people dying
of malnutrition and disease.98
And this is all being done by the United States for its own reasons. It has
nothing much to do with disliking Saddam Hussein-as you can see from the
fact that he was George Bush's great friend and trading partner right up
until the moment of the Kuwait invasion.99 Or as you can see from the fact
that the Bush White House intervened repeatedly well into 1990 to prevent
the Treasury Department and others who thought Iraq wasn't creditworthy
from cutting back on U.S. loan guarantees to their dear friend Saddam
Hussein.100 Or as you can see from the fact that we supported him again
immediately after the war ended, as he was decimating internal resistance
to his rule with "Stormin' Norman" Schwarzkopf [the U.S. general] sitting
nearby and refusing even to lift a finger.101
WOMAN: So you think in the end the U.S. just wanted to regain control
of the Kuwaiti oil fields that Saddam had captured-it was just a war fought
for oil?
Well, a good place to start if you want to know what something was
about is to look to see what changes it introduced. And particularly in the
case of a war planned in advance where the outcome was never in any
doubt, I think you have solid reason to believe the result was what the thing
was really for in the first place. Well, what changes did the Gulf War introduce? The one big thing that happened right as soon as the war ended was
that the U.S. arranged the Madrid Conference on the Middle East [in October 1991], which set off what was called the "peace process" that culminated in Israel and the P.L.O. signing the Oslo Agreement in 1994-and with
that, the U.S. and Israel won their twenty-year campaign of rejecting the
possibility of Palestinian national rights, flat out.102 The Palestinians were
basically destroyed. [Editors' Note: The Oslo Agreement is discussed in
more detail at the end of this chapter and in chapter 8.]
In fact, you didn't even need hindsight to figure this out, it was perfectly
obvious right at the time of the Gulf War that this was going to happen-like, I had an article in Z Magazine saying, okay, now that the Gulf War is
over, the U.S. will try to ram through its rejectionist program for a settlement of the Palestinian question.103 And that's exactly what happened.
So look at what took place. The last of the annual U.N. votes on the
Palestinians was held in December 1990, and the result was the same as always: 144 to 2, the U.S. and Israel standing alone against the rest of the

170

Understanding Power

world in rejecting any sort of recognition of Palestinian national rights.104
Then came the U.S. bombardment of Iraq in January 1991. After the war,
the U.S. set up the Madrid Conference and the U.N. didn't hold any more
votes on the Palestinian question after that. The Madrid Conference was run
completely by the U.S.-it was based totally on American programs, there
was nothing for the Palestinians at all. The agenda was, Israel takes what it
wants from the Occupied Territories; the relationships between Israel and
the U.S.-client oil monarchies in the region, like Saudi Arabia and Oman
and Qatar and so on (which have always existed, even though they were
officially at war), now kind of rise above the surface and become more
overt-and the Palestinians get it in the neck, they're offered nothing. And
that was the big effect of the Gulf War: it sort of intimidated everyone, it
was a big show of American power that demonstrated that the U.S. will use
force to get its way wherever it feels like it, now that the Soviet Union is
out of the game. So the Soviet Union was gone-there was no longer that
space left for Third World countries to be independent and "non-aligned."
And also, the entire Third World just had been devastated by the huge crisis
of capitalism that swept the world in the 1980s. Arab nationalism had been
dealt yet another blow by Saddam's aggression and P.L.O. tactics of more
than the usual ineptitude; so the rulers of the Arab states had less need than
before to respond to popular pressures and make pro-Palestinian gestures.
Well, after all that, it really was no longer necessary for the U.S. to undermine all diplomatic initiatives in the Middle East, as we'd been doing for
the past twenty years. Now we could just use force. The Gulf War was the
first demonstration of that.
So everybody was scared shitless by it, and Europe finally backed off on
the question of Palestinian national rights: they don't even make any proposals about that anymore. In fact, it was kind of interesting that even Norway agreed to be the intermediary in 1993, and to help implement U.S. and
Israeli rejectionism in the Oslo Agreement-they wouldn't have done that a
couple years earlier.
And that's primarily what the Gulf War was about, I think. It wasn't
about fear of losing oil. It wasn't about international law, or principled opposition to aggression or anything like that. It wasn't that they didn't like
Saddam Hussein-they didn't care about Saddam Hussein one way or the
other. It was that after the Gulf War was over, the U.S. was in a perfect position to ram through its rejectionist program and fully extend the Monroe
Doctrine to the Middle East [the Monroe Doctrine was proclaimed by the
U.S. in 1823 and stated that Latin America was the exclusive domain of the
United States, not the European colonial powers]. It was our way of saying:
"Look, this is our turf, we'll do what we feel like here." As George Bush in
fact put it: "What we say goes." 105 Now the world understands that; the
Gulf War helped them understand it.

Chapter Five

171

Bosnia: Intervention Questions
MAN: Noam, do you recall any major issues on which your views have totally flip-flopped at some point, perhaps by thinking them out more or
something like that? It strikes me that your positions have remained extremely consistent over the years. Or are there issues that you wish you'd
written and talked about, but haven't yet?
Well, there are a lot of major issues on which I simply haven't taken any
position-just because I don't really know what to say. For example, take the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s [i.e. after the breakup
of the Soviet bloc in 1991 and '92, Bosnia and Herzegovina began the
process of seceding from Yugoslavia and several years of civil war between
the Croat, Muslim, and Serb populations followed]. I didn't really have any
opinion on what to do about that, actually. I never heard a good proposal
about how to resolve it, and I didn't have one myself-so when people asked
me to comment on it, I just talked about the general problems and gave no
proposal. And in fact, there are plenty of major issues like that in the world,
where I just don't know what to say-I don't see any good solutions, or even
anything very helpful that could be done. Fortunately there are hundreds of
other cases where there are obvious things that can be done, and I think
those are the ones where we really ought to focus our attention.
But Bosnia was a striking example-just because everybody was talking
so much about it-of an issue where if anyone had a good idea about how to
stop the atrocities, I missed it. I mean, lots of people said, "Let's bomb
everybody" -okay, great. And there were a lot of people posturing and
preening their feathers about how they were the only moral ones because
they were opposed to what was happening in Sarajevo [the Bosnian capital,
where ethnic warfare raged in the early 1990s]. Yeah, sure, we all were opposed to what was happening in Sarajevo-but what did you propose to do
about it? That's where it got a lot less obvious. Kill the Serbs? They're
human beings too, you know, and it's not like the position of these Serb
peasants up in the hills is zero. I mean, maybe their lifestyle's not as much
like ours as all those nice Europeans in Sarajevo, but they're people too. In
fact, I should say that there's been a lot of class bias in general in the Western reactions to what's been going on there, and in the media coverage in
particular. But even if you did decide that it was the Serb peasants who
were the killers and the people in Sarajevo were like Gandhi, still the
question remained: what should you do? Okay, that's where it got very
hard.
And there are plenty of other issues like that too. Take Rwanda [where
more than half a million people were killed in a civil war in 1994]-you can
see plenty of things people shouldn't have done, but once the massacres got
started, I don't know of a lot that anybody could do about them. They were
horrendous, certainly, but what exactly could you do?

172

Understanding Power
Toying With India

MAN: Professor Chomsky, India is refusing to sign the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty unless the countries that already have nuclear
weapons agree to give them up. That seems to me to be a pretty brazen
contravention of u.s. authority, especially for a poor Third World country
like India. Why do you think they're saying that, and what is the U.S.
reaction going to be to that kind of disobedience?
Well, India is basically just saying what everybody else in the Third
World thinks but is afraid to say publicly: that the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty is a ridiculous joke. I mean, the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty is just a way of ensuring that the rich powerful
countries have a monopoly of nuclear weapons-not much else. Now,
obviously nuclear proliferation is a bad thing-but you know, is it better for
the United States to have them? Do we have a better record in international
affairs than India? Well, everybody in the Third World can appreciate that
hypocrisy, but not a lot of them are willing to get up and say it. In India
they do say it-and actually that's not so surprising.
You see, India is a fairly independent country. It was the head of the
Non-Aligned Movement [a coalition of Third World nations at the U.N.],
and it's a big country-in fact, within a small number of years India will
probably be larger than China, if you project the current population growth
rates.106 India was also one of the first countries to be colonized, and it was
destroyed by colonialism-and however brainwashed Indian intellectuals
may be (and they are), an understanding of that history is not very deep
below the surface. And it does show up in independence. For example, take
Nehru [the first Indian Prime Minister]: although he was very pro-Western
and very anglophile, he was absolutely despised by American leaders. You
should see the stuff that's coming out about him these days in declassified
American documents, they just hated him with a passion. And the reason
was, he was standing up for some level of Indian independence.107 And that
streak of independence in India has remained.
In fact, if you look over the history of U.S. attitudes towards India since
British decolonization [in 1947], they've in general been kind of ambivalent. On the one hand, the U.S. was opposed to India because it was fairly
independent-it was trying to develop an independent economy and an independent foreign policy. But on the other hand, the U.S. was extremely
worried about China right next door-they were worried about Chinese
economic success in the years after their revolution [in 1949], because they
were very much afraid that China would be a development model that other
Third World countries would want to follow. So we have extensive
declassified documents on this stretching until roughly the early 1960s, and
right into the time of the Kennedy administration the documentary record is
very explicit: the big fear was that China was starting to look too suc-

Chapter Five

173

cessful. And therefore, much as they disliked it, U.S. planners determined
that they had to support India as sort of the democratic alternative to China,
so then they could say to other countries: the Indian way is better than the
Chinese way, be capitalist, have a parliament and so on. And if you look
over the history, that ambivalence did lead to policy conflicts.108
For instance, the U.S. gave very little aid to India. In fact, sometimes it
was absolutely scandalous-like, right after Indian independence, in around
1950, India had its last massive famine (under the British there were
famines all the time), and while there aren't very good statistics, probably
something on the order of maybe 13 to 15 million people died from starvation. Well, we have the U.S. internal records from that period, and at first
there wasn't even any question of giving them aid-I mean, we had food
coming out our ears, just huge food surpluses, but there was no aid going to
India because we did not like Nehru's independence and his moves towards
non-alignment and neutrality. But then there was a discussion about
whether the U.S. should give India food aid as a weapon-that is, we give
them some food aid as a way of forcing them to accept U.S. policies on various issues. And after that, a little bit of aid was trickled out-but it was delayed and conditioned on India's accepting American positions on things
like the Korean War and so on. Nobody knows exactly how many millions
of people died because of that.109
By the 1960s under Kennedy, the U.S. was shifting towards giving some
aid to India to make it sort of a counterweight to China, so they'd look good
as compared with Communist China-but again, the aid was with strings
attached. For instance, India badly needed fertilizers, and they wanted to
develop their own fertilizer industry using hydrocarbon resources-which
they had plenty of, along with a lot of other energy resources-but they
needed U.S. aid to do it. And after a big discussion in the United States,
which you can read about in the pages of the New York Times if you look
back, a decision was made here to help them do it-but only if they would
use Western-based hydrocarbons. So India was not allowed to develop its
own hydrocarbon resources, instead they had to buy them from the
American oil companies, and in addition they had to allow dominant U.S.
control over the fertilizer and any other industries which developed. Well,
India resisted those conditions very strongly-but in the end, they had to give
in. And you can read New York Times articles in the 1960s recognizing this
situation, and basically saying: well, the Indians don't like it, but there's
nothing they can do about it, because we've got them by the throat-they'll
just have to do what we want.110
Well, alright, that sort of ambivalent dynamic continued through the
1970s and Eighties. In the 1980s, India had a very fast growth rate, but it
also adopted extremely bad fiscal policies which got them deeply into debtand the debt crisis led them into accepting structural adjustment "reforms,"
as throughout the Third World. In India's case, the reforms have actually
been fairly moderate, though they've still had the usual effects: for

174

Understanding Power

most of the population there's been a decline, and for an elite sector it's
meant wealth. The country shot into a deep depression right away, but recently it's been pulling out of it, though still it hasn't recovered the 1980s
growth rates-and of course, the recovery is extremely inegalitarian in terms
of who actually "recovers." But right now the U.S. is very supportive of
India, because the country has opened itself even more to Western control.
Still, there's also this history of independence which doesn't go away so
easily. And sometimes it does show up in India doing things like speaking
up against the hypocrisy of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, when
most other Third World countries would be too afraid to step out of line
like that.
The Oslo Agreement and Imperialist Revival
MAN: Noam, you said that the Oslo Agreement in the Middle East was sort
of a consequence of the Gulf War-I'm wondering, what do you think are the
prospects for the Palestinians now that they've signed it? And do you see
them still being able to organize resistance to the Israeli occupation, even
without pressure from international solidarity movements in the West?
Well, first of all, it's not the Palestinians who signed anything. It was the
group around Arafat-and they simply made a decision to capitulate. And as
far as the prospects go for the Palestinian people right now, in the absence
of serious international solidarity movements, their hopes are dead-because this agreement was a complete sellout, it was a total capitulation.
A couple nights ago I was reading an article in the Israeli press by a
friend of mine at Tel Aviv University, who summarized what's been going
on very nicely. She said: people in Israel are comparing this agreement with
the end of apartheid in South Africa, but the true comparison is with the
onset of apartheid-with the enactment of the 1950s laws in South Africa
which set up the Bantustans [partially self-governing black districts].lll And
that's right, that's more or less what the Oslo Agreement is: it's
enslavement, it's a plan for enslavement, with about as much independence
for the Territories-less maybe-as the Bantustans had. So that means that the
whole struggle against apartheid is just beginning right now, not ending.
Israel and the United States essentially got the settlement they'd been
holding out for for more than twenty years, and for which the U.S. has
blocked every international diplomatic initiative without exception for well
over twenty years.112 In 1994 they finally won, the world capitulated-it's not
that the Palestinians capitulated, the whole world capitulated on this one. In
fact, it capitulated so profoundly that it doesn't even remember what it
stood for for so long.

Chapter Five

175

It's amazing in Europe: Europe has become extraordinarily colonized
culturally by the United States, to an extent that is almost unbelievable-Europeans aren't aware of it apparently, but if you go there it's kind of like
a pale United States at this point, yet they still have this feeling of great independence, so it's even more dramatic. I mean, Western European intellectuals like to think of themselves as very sophisticated and sort of laughing
about these dumb Americans-but they are so brainwashed by the United
States that it's a joke. Their perceptions of the world and their misunderstandings and so on are all filtered through American television and movies
and newspapers, but somehow by this point they just don't recognize it.
And one of the issues where this is most clearly demonstrated is with respect to the Middle East. I mean, it's not ancient history, but on the issue of
the right of self-determination for the Palestinians, the Europeans have just
forgotten what they stood for, at least on paper, until around the time of the
Gulf War-because anything like self-determination is completely out of the
Oslo Agreement. 113
The long-term arrangement between Israel and the Palestinians now will
be in terms of U.N. 242 alone. [UN. 242 was a November 1967 United
Nations Security Council Resolution calling for Israel to withdraw from the
territory it had just seized and for a regional peace treaty.] Well, the whole
battle all along has been about whether a settlement in the Middle East is
going to be just in terms of UN. 242, which doesn't say anything about the
Palestinians, or U.N. 242 plus other UN. Resolutions which also call for
Palestinian rights. Well, now it turns out that the answer is just 242-so
Israel does whatever it feels like.
Right now there are huge construction projects going up all over the Occupied Territories (with, as always, U.S. funding), and Israel will just continue with its settlement program [the idea is to "settle" Jewish citizens in
the Palestinian territories, which are not officially part of the state of Israel,
to solidify Israel's claim to them]. And what they've pretty much been doing
is creating a large bulge of Jewish settlers around this big area they call
"Greater Jerusalem," in order to break the West Bank into two separate
parts and enclose Jerusalem-they're basically breaking the West Bank into
two cantons, where they'll then gladly cede authority to the local cops to do
the dirty business of keeping order. It would be like asking the New York
City police force whether they would like to turn Harlem over to local mercenaries to patrol, while they hold on to Wall Street, the Upper East Side,
Madison Avenue, and so on-if you asked the New York City police force
that, I'm sure they'd be delighted. Who wants to patrol Harlem?
Well, that's in effect what's happening in the Occupied Territories right
now: the idea is, see if you can get local mercenaries, who are still always
under your whip, to run the place for you, while you continue integrating
the area into Israel. Actually, some Israeli commentators have used the term
"neocolonialism" to describe what's being done with the Territories, and
that's essentially correct, I think.114

176

Understanding Power

In fact, I think what's been taking place in the Middle East is really just a
part of something much broader that's happened throughout the West in
recent years, particularly since the Gulf War: there's been a real revival of
traditional European racism and imperialism, in a very dramatic way. I
mean, people often talk about neo-fascists being on the rise, but I think that's
really missing the point: they're just the froth on the surface. In my view,
what we're seeing now is a profound revival of pure old-fashioned racist
imperialism, with regard to the entire Third World. You see it in articles by
British journalists in the New York Times Magazine about how the best thing
we can do for Africa is to recolonize it; it shows up at the economic level in
structural adjustment programs, which are a big part of how we siphon off
the wealth of the Third World to the rich countries; the anti-immigrant
campaigns in the U.S. and Europe are a part of it; this program for the
Palestinians is another part of it-and one could go on and on.115 The idea is,
"We smashed up the world and stole everything from it-now we're not going
to let anyone come and take any piece of it back." That's an attitude I see
right on the surface all over the place in the West these days.
So to go back to your question, the Oslo Agreement was just a complete
capitulation. I mean, I'm not saying it shouldn't have been signed-like,
maybe that's the best that the Palestinians could do given the state they were
in. But we shouldn't have any illusions about it: all of their problems are
exactly the same, maybe worse. And unless there's support from the West ...
I don't know what to say. Without support from inside the imperial
countries, no group in the Third World has any hope. The Palestinians
certainly don't.

6

Community Activists
Based on discussions in British Columbia, Massachusetts, Illinois,
Maryland, and Wyoming in 1989 and between 1993 and 1996.

Discussion Circle
... I hardly know what to say. What all of you said reflects, I think very
accurately, the state that we're in. Any place I go to, there are people like
you. They're all interested in significant, important problems-problems of
personal empowerment, of understanding the world, of working with others,
of just finding out what your values are; of trying to figure out how people
can control their own lives, and helping each other to do it. We're all facing
essentially the same fact: there's no structure of popular institutions around
within which we can work.
You don't have to go back very far in history to find that in past days, a
group like us wouldn't have been meeting in a place like this: we would
have been meeting in the labor union headquarters. There's still a residue of
that in parts of the world. For instance, I was in England last week giving
political talks, and talks in England are not in churches or on college campuses, they're in a guild hall-because in England there's still a residue of the
period when there was a popular movement, a workers' movement, with its
own media, its own places of gathering, its own ways of bringing people
together. There was a time when we had a working-class culture here too. I
mean, I can remember it-barely, because I was a child-but there was a live
working-class culture in the United States not that long ago. My family was
in it, that's how I got my political education. A lot of it was centered around
the Communist Party [U.S.A.], which for the people who were involved in it
didn't mean supporting Stalin's crimes, it meant saving people's lives in the
South, and unionizing industry, and being at the front of every civil rights
struggle, doing everything that was important.
I mean, the American Communist Party had a lot of terrible things about
it, but it also had a lot of very good things too. And one of them was this177

178

Understanding Power

I mean, that was a life. The Communist Party wasn't something you voted
for, it was something where if you were an unemployed seamstress in New
York and you wanted to get away for the summer, they had a summer camp
where you could go and be with your friends, get into the Catskill Mountains, that sort of thing. And it was picnics, and meetings, and concerts,
fighting on picket lines, demonstrations, the whole business. That was all
just normal life, it was very organic.
And they had their own media. In fact, you don't have to go back too far
in the United States, a little earlier than that, to find working-class and
community-based newspapers that were roughly at the scale of the mainstream capitalist press. So a journal like Appeal to Reason, which was sort
of a socialist journal in the early part of the century, had I think about three
quarters of a million subscribers-meaning who knows how many people
actually read it.! And that was in a much smaller population than today of
course, much smaller.
Now, we're not in anything like that situation: we don't have parties, we
don't have media, we don't have stable institutions-so, this group isn't
meeting in a union hall, because there isn't any such thing. On the other
hand, we have other advantages. There's a tremendous diversity and range
of interests and concerns now, and an awful lot of people are involved. And
that gives us a kind of strength: an organized, centralized movement can
easily be crushed; a very diverse movement that's rooted all over the society-well, you can get rid of this piece and that piece and the other piece, but
it'll just come back up somewhere else. So there are both strengths and
weaknesses, and I think we should recognize that.
My own feeling is that the right approach is to build on the strengths: to
recognize what's healthy and solid about having not hundreds, but thousands of flowers blooming all over the place-people with parallel concerns,
maybe differently focused, but at the core sort of similar values and a
similar interest in empowerment, in learning, in helping people understand
how to defend themselves against external power and take control of their
own lives, in reaching out your hand to people who need it. All the things
that you people have talked about-that's a common array of concerns. And
the fact that there's a tremendous diversity can be a real advantage-it can be
a real way of learning, of learning about yourself, and what you care about,
and what you want to do, and so on. But of course, if it's going to bring
about real change, that broad array of concerns is going to require some
form of integration and inter-communication and collaboration among its
various sub-parts.
Now, we're not going to develop that sort of integration through the
mainstream institutions-that would be crazy. I mean, you should not expect
an institution to say, "Help me destroy myself," that's not the way institutions function. And if anybody inside the institution tried to do that,
they wouldn't be inside it much longer. Now, that's not to say that you can
do nothing if you're already in something like the mass media. People who

Chapter Six

179

have seeped in from the popular movements can have effects-and people
outside them can also have effects, just by barraging the editors and so on. I
mean, the editors don't like people coming to their doors and causing
trouble any more than politicians do, or businessmen do. And if you come
and you bother them, and give them material, and pressure them, you can
sometimes get results. But in the end, there really are only small changes
that can be made within the existing institutions-because they've got their
own commitments, which are basically to private power. In the case of the
media, they have a commitment to indoctrination in the interests of power,
and that imposes pretty strict limits on what they can do.
So the answer is, we've got to create alternatives, and the alternatives
have got to integrate these lots and lots of different interests and concerns
into a movement-or maybe not one necessarily, which somebody could
then cut the head off of, but a series of interconnected ones: lots of associations of people with similar concerns, who've got in mind the other people
next door who have related concerns, and who can get together with them
to work for changes. Maybe then we can ultimately construct serious alternative media-I mean, not "serious" in the sense that the concerns of existing
alternative media aren't serious, but serious in scale, at the point where they
can consistently present people with a different picture of the world, a
picture different than the one you get from an indoctrination system based
on private control over resources. And as to how you can do that, well, I
don't think there's any big secret about it-if there's any big secret about
getting social change, I've never heard of it.
WOMAN: Just keep organizing.
Yes-large-scale social change in the past and major social revolutions in
the past, so far as I know, have come about just because lots of people,
working wherever they are, have worked hard, and have looked around to
find other people who are working hard, and have tried to work together
with them when they find them. I think every social change in history, from
the democratic revolutions to things like the Civil Rights Movement, has
worked that way. It's mostly just a question of scale and dedication. There
are plenty of resources around that people can use; they're very scatteredbut
part of the way the institutions protect themselves is to keep them scattered.
It's very important for institutions of concentrated power to keep people
alone and isolated: that way they're ineffective, they can't defend
themselves against indoctrination, they can't even figure out what they
think.
So I think it makes sense to look at what the institutions are doing and to
take that almost as a key: what they're trying to do is what we're trying to
combat. If they're keeping people isolated and separate, well, we're trying
to do the opposite, we're trying to bring them together. So in your local
community, you want to have "unity groups" or whatever they're called, I

180

Understanding Power

don't know, " 'left' unity groups"-I don't even like the word. But you want
to turn them into sources of alternative action that people can get involved
with, and can join in together to fight the effects of atomization. There are
plenty of resources around, enormous numbers of people are interested-and
if you don't see organizations that are doing things, well, figure out what
you can do, and do it yourself. I don't think there are any secrets.
MAN: The greatest source of information for me in these past couple years
has been our co-op radio. And I trust everyone here supports co-op radioif
not, well, you should. Because we have to cultivate and develop any form of
alternate media that is working, or that we can think of that will work. So I
just want to say, hats off to co-op radio: I'm glad you're here.
It's certainly true-when you go to towns or communities that have alternative radio or other media that involve community participation, the
general mood is strikingly different. And the reason is, people there are
constantly challenged with a different point of view, and they can
participate in the debates, they're not just passive spectators. That's the way
you learn, that's the way you discover who you are, and what you really
want, it's how you figure out your own values and gain understanding. You
have to be able to knock ideas off other people and hear them get beaten
down in order to find out what you actually think. That's learning, as
distinct from indoctrination-and listener-supported radio is very good in
that respect. But the same is true of the whole tremendous network of
alternative media that exists by now on just about every imaginable issue,
all over Canada and the United States .
For instance, I don't know how many of you know the journal Z Magazine, but it's a political journal that's an offshoot of South End Press, which
brings together interests of essentially the sort that you've all been raising
here. And it's national, and you read it in one place and see that people are
thinking about the same things somewhere else, and you write a letter in, or
propose an article and so on-that's the type of serious intercommunication
that we want to foster. After all, we're living in a world where you don't
have to talk just to the person who lives next door, we have the same
interests as people all across the world, and these days we can communicate
with them. In fact, as they develop, things like this could really help to
unify the popular movements, and they should be pressed as far as they can
go, I think.2
The Early Peace Movement and a Change in the 1970s
MAN: Noam, there are two contradictory strains that I can identify in your
work on the question of "hope." On the one hand, you speak about the ef-

Chapter Six

181

forts organizing on behalf of Central America and East Timor and other
activist causes-some of the successes that people like us have had. But on
the other hand, I hear you always talking about the destructions the U.S.
and other powers are causing all over the world, and it seems to me that
you draw a picture of an overall global trend which is very despairing. I'm
wondering, how do you deal with that tension personally-do you just keep
doing what you do because it's the right thing to do, or do you actually
have a sense of hope in it?
Do I personally? Well, first of all, I don't think that matters very muchbecause that's only a reflection of my personality and mood, and who gives
a damn? But if I try to be realistic about it and ask myself what I could say
that would mean something to someone else-well, you know, twenty-five
years ago I did it because I thought you just have to do it, you can't look
yourself in the mirror if you don't do it. I didn't think that there was any
hope at all at the time. I mean, when I got involved in the anti-Vietnam
War movement, it seemed to me impossible that it would ever have any
effect. In fact, the few of us who got involved in the early Sixties
confidently expected that the only consequence of what we were doing
would be that we'd spend years and years in jail and destroy our lives; I
came very close to that, incidentally.
I mean, just to tell you personally, when I got started actively in the
peace movement my wife went back to college, because we figured that
somebody was going to have to support the kids, I wasn't going to be able
to. And in fact, there were only two reasons why that didn't happen. One
was, the EB.I. was too incompetent and ideologically fanatic to figure out
what I was doing-that's not a joke actually, and it's something to bear in
mind. And the other was, the Tet Offensive happened in 1968, and it
changed U.S. government policy towards the war, so they began to cancel
the prosecutions of activists that were under way. In fact, the Tet Offensive
even changed people's heads-you know who was prosecuting those trials?
Ramsey Clark, just to illustrate how things have changed. [Clark was President Johnson's Attorney General and is now a radical political activist.]
But those were pretty difficult days: it was real confrontation with state
power, and it was getting ugly, especially if you were involved in
resistance, helping deserters, that sort of thing. And it was just impossible
at that time to imagine that anything would come out of it. And that was
wrong, a lot came out of it-not out of what I did, but out of what lots and
lots of people were doing all over the country. A lot came out of it. So
looking back, I think my evaluation of the "hope" was much too
pessimistic: it was based on a complete misunderstanding. I was sort of
believing what I read. And the immediate experience supported it-like,
right off, you found that when you tried to give a talk you needed two
hundred cops to save you from being lynched. But it didn't take too long for
that to change, and in a couple years it had changed very significantly.

182

Understanding Power

Now, I don't think what happened with the movements in the 1960s led
to very much sophistication and insight, frankly-but I think what happened
in the later years did. And exactly how that worked I don't really understand at all. But something happened in the 1970s that just changed
things-people were looking at things differently. It wasn't just, "I hate that
they're dropping napalm on babies," it was, "I really want to change the
world, and I don't like coercion and control," and that kind of thing. That
happened in the Seventies, and you can certainly see the consequences. I
mean, in the 1960s, I never even talked about the nature of the institutions
or capitalism-it was just too exotic. Now I don't cut corners: I can be giving
a talk in eastern Kentucky or in central Iowa or something, and I say
exactly what I think. And people understand it-they may not agree, they
may be surprised, but they want to listen and think about it, and they take it
seriously. So I think there's reason to be hopeful.
But on the other hand, don't forget, the people with power in the society
are watching all these things too, and they have institutions. They can learn,
they can see what didn't work the last time and do it better the next timeand they have plenty of resources to tryout different strategies. On our side
what happens is, people forget. I mean, it does take skills to organize, it's
not that simple. You want to organize a demonstration or a letterwriting
campaign or do fundraising, it does take skills-and those skills tend to get
lost. You can see it happening over and over. The people who do it the first
time around work hard and learn how to do things, then get burnt out and
drift off to something else. Then another issue comes up, and others with a
roughly similar understanding, but maybe a little younger or less
experienced, have to start over again and learn all the skills from the beginning. How do you organize a meeting? How do you get leaflets out? Is it
worth approaching the press? In what way do you approach them? Well,
since we don't have stable popular institutions, all these things that you
kind of get in your bones after a while if you do a lot of organizing do not
become part of the common lore that the movements could call on and improve upon, if we only had more integration and more continuity. But for
people with power, there is a common lore, and they do improve upon it.
In fact, this is part of an ongoing battle that stretches back to the seventeenth century. If you go back to the beginnings of the modern version of
democracy, it's the same conflict: people are trying to figure out ways to
control their own lives, and people with power are trying to stop them.
Now, until we dissolve the centers of private power and really get popular
control over how the most crucial decisions in the society get made-like the
decisions about what's produced and what's invested and so on-this battle is
always going to go on. But yes, there have been both victories and defeats:
you can look at the course of events and see many significant victories by
gangsters and murderers and thugs, and you can also see many respects in
which people have been able to stop them, and limit their victories, and
offer people an opportunity to keep living and to improve their lives. So it
doesn't make sense to be either optimistic or pessimistic, I think. You

Chapter Six

183

just look at what's happening and try to do the best you can under those circumstances.
WOMAN: Can I give it a whack? For years I've been working with people
who are doing twenty-five years in prison and never getting out, that sort of
thing. To answer the question, "How do you keep going?"-I figure, the most
pessimistic way to look at it is, it's really bad: fifty thousand nuclear bombs
(loating around, we don't need some dumb American President to put his
finger on the wrong button. I figure, it's a miracle that we're here, realistically, let's face it.
It is.
WOMAN: Okay, so if you accept that, you have two choices: you can cut
your throat and forget about it, or you can keep fighting. If you're going to
keep fighting, then you've got to fight to win, and to survive. So what you
do is, you find yourself a corner that you can fight really well from, and
that you like, and that you fit in-and you give it the works, have a good
time. That way you can keep your sanity, you don't get overwhelmed with
the whole enormous situation, and you can accomplish something. And as
I say, you have a good time while you're doing it-that's the way I keep go
mg.
MAN: But do you ever succeed, or do you just keep fighting?
Well, see, you have succeeded-things are better than they would have
been if you hadn't done it.
ANOTHER WOMAN: And we should remember that the mainstream media
obviously won't publicize and draw attention to the successes-so we have to
keep reminding ourselves of just how much we have achieved. I think we
get burned out when we stop reminding ourselves of that.
That's right, we should always bear that in mind-that they're not going
to tell us we're succeeding, it would be against their interests to tell us that. ~ y; The
media's part of what popular organizing has to oppose, remember. And", ~ they're
not going to function in a way so as to self-destruct.
For instance, take this supposed big phenomenon that swept the country in the
1970s, the "Culture of Narcissism," and the "Me Generation" and so on. I'm just
convinced that that whole thing was crafted by the public relations industry to tell
mainly young people, "Look, this is who you areyou don't care about all this
solidarity and sympathy and helping people" that had started to break out. And of
course, that's what they would do. In fact, they shouldn't get their salaries if they
don't do things like that. We should expect them to do it, we should expect them to
tell us: "You guys can't do anything, you're all alone, you're each separate; you've
never

184

Understanding Power

achieved anything, and you never will achieve anything." Of course they
should tell us that-and they should even tell us, "You don't want to achieve
anything, all you want to do is consume more."
As long as power's concentrated, that's what it's going to tell us"There's no point in working to help other people, you don't care about
them, you're just out for yourself." Sure it's going to tell us that, because
that's what's in its interests. There's no point in telling ourselves, "They're
lying to us" over and over again. Of course they are; it's like saying the
sun's setting or something like that. Obviously they are.
So what we want to try to do is develop stable enough structures so that
we can learn these kinds of things and not keep getting beaten down by the
indoctrination-so we don't have to keep fighting the same battles over and
over again, we can go on to new ones, and bigger ones, better ones. I think
that could be done; slowly, over time.
MAN: Do you see any of those sorts of continuing progressive structures
developing these days in the United States?
There isn't a lot, it's mostly local. So I'll go to some place like Detroit,
say, and there'll be a meeting like this with people from different parts of
the city who are working on different things-but many of them don't even
know about the others. Everything is pretty much fractionated. Now, if you
go to a small town which has listener-supported radio-like Boulder, Colorado, for instance-it's different, it's unified. And part of the reason it's
unified is because of one community radio station and a couple of journals
and so on that everybody can be a part of. Or I remember going to some
town in New Hampshire which happeQed to have a movement bookstore,
and everybody went to the bookstore to find out what was going on, you'd
go there and look at what's on the wall and stick together that way. You do
find things like that around the country.
But take Boston, where there's nothing central to bring people togetherthere's no community radio, there's no community newspaper. I mean, there
are lots of people doing all sorts of activist work, but they don't even know
about each other: there's a group in one section working on Bikes for
Nicaragua, there's a group in another section of the city working on a Sister
Cities program for Central America, they don't even know of each other's
existence.
The Nuclear Freeze Movement
WOMAN: What else do you feel we can learn from organizations you don't
think are going about it the right way?
Well, there are plenty of groups around that are doing things I don't
think are very constructive, even though I'm often a member of them and

Chapter Six

185

give them support and so on. Take the nuclear freeze campaign, for example: I really thought they were going about it the wrong way. The nuclear
freeze campaign was in a way one of the most successful popular organizing movements in history: they managed to get 75 percent of the American
population in favor of a nuclear freeze at a time when there was no articulate public support for that position-there wasn't a newspaper, a political
figure, anybody who came out publicly for it.3 Now, in a way that's a
tremendous achievement. But frankly I didn't think it was an achievement, I
thought the disarmament movement was going to collapse-and in fact, it did
collapse. And the reason it collapsed is, it wasn't based on anything: it was
based on nothing except people signing a petition.
I mean, if you sign a petition it's kind of nice-but that's the end of it, you
just go back home and do whatever you were doing: there's no continuity,
there's no real engagement, it's not sustained activity that builds up a I'
community of activism. Well, an awful lot of the political work I see in the '
United States is of that type.
Now, if we had stable popular institutions, we'd be able to remember
how we failed the last time, instead of somebody else doing it all over again
and making the same mistakes-we'd know that's not the way to do anything.
The nuclear freeze movement amounted to a public opinion poll, basically:
they found out that three times as many people want the government to
spend the money on Medicare and things like that as want it spent on
nuclear weapons. So what? What are they going to do about it? Nothing. So
all these nuclear freeze people did was answer a poll question-that's not
organizing.
I think an awful lot of movement activity goes into things like that, and
it doesn't get anywhere-in fact, that's what leads to burn-out. I mean, you
had all these people collecting all these signatures, and they worked hard,
they got so many signatures you could show that almost all of the country
wants a nuclear freeze. Then they went to the Democratic Party Convention
[in 1984] and presented their results, and everybody there said, "Gee, that's
really nice that you did that, we're going to support you all the way" -then
the Democrats went off to the election and never mentioned it again, unless
they were talking in some town where they figured they could score some
easy points by referring to it: you know, "We've got to remember in this
town you want to say so on and so forth." That's the kind' of thing that gets
people frustrated, and makes them give up. But that's because they started
with illusions about how power operates and how you effect change-and we
shouldn't have those illusions, any more than we should have illusions
about whether the media's telling you the truth. If you don't have the
illusions, then you don't get burnt out by the failure-and the way we
overcome the illusions is by developing our own institutions, where we can
learn from experiences like this.
For instance, if we see a big organizing effort where everybody signs the
petitions and some people try to introduce the issue into the '84 Democratic
Party platform, and it has absolutely no effect, and a year later Mikhail

186

Understanding Power

Gorbachev [Soviet leader] declares a unilateral nuclear test freeze and still
there's no effect-well, we should be learning something.4 Then we should
be carrying on to the next step. But that wasn't the reaction of the nuclear
freeze organizers. The reaction among the organizers wasn't, "Well, we obviously misunderstood the way things work"-it was, "We did the right
thing, but we partially failed: we convinced the population, but we didn't
manage to convince the elites, so now let's convince the elites." You know,
"We'll go talk to the strategic analysts, who are confused-they don't understand what we understand-and we'll explain to them why a nuclear
freeze would be a good thing." And in fact, that's the direction a lot of the
disarmament movement took after that: the people went off and got themselves MacArthur Fellowships and so on, and then they went around "convincing" the strategic analysts.s
Well, that's one of the ways in which you can kid yourself into believing
that you're still doing your work, when really you're being bought off-because there's nothing that elites like better than saying, "Oh, come convince
me." That stops you from organizing, and getting people involved, and
causing disruption, because now you're talking to some elite smart guy-and you can do that forever: any argument you can give in favor of it, he
can give an argument against it, and it just keeps going. And also, you get
respectable, and you're invited to lunch at the Harvard Faculty Club, and
everybody pays attention to you and loves you, and it's all great. That's in
fact the direction in which the nuclear freeze movement went-and that's a
mistake. And we ought to be aware of those mistakes and learn from them:
if you're getting accepted in elite circles, chances are very strong that you're
doing something wrong-I mean, for very simple reasons. Why should they
have any respect for people who are trying to undermine their power? It
doesn't make any sense.
Awareness and Actions
MAN: A lot of the activists I work with operate under the assumption that if
we can just make people aware, everything's going to work out and there'll
be a change. Even with c.d. [civil disobedience} actions protesting nuclear
weapons, that's been my assumption too: get people to see us doing it, hold
up our signs. But it seems like that's not all that is needed, really--what
more, would you say, besides education?
Education is just the beginning-and furthermore, there are situations
where you can get everybody aware and on your side, and they still won't
be able to do anything. Like, take a look at Haiti. I don't think there's much
doubt about what 90 percent of the population there wants, and they're
aware of it-they just can't do anything about it without getting slaughtered.
So there's a whole series of things which have to happen, and they

Chapter Six

187

begin with awareness; you don't do anything without awareness, obviously--you don't do anything unless you're aware that there's something
that ought to be done, so that's the beginning almost by definition. But real
awareness in fact comes about through practice and experience with the
world. It's not, first you become aware and then you start doing things; you
become aware through doing things.
For instance, you become aware of the limits of reformist politics by trying it. In my view, you should always push all of the opportunities to their
limits-partly because sometimes you can get some useful results that help
people, but primarily because pretty soon you'll find out what those limits
are, and you'll understand why there are limits; you'll gain awareness you
can't gain from a lecture. I mean, you can hear all the lectures you like
about the way that power works, but you learn it very fast when you
actually confront it, without the lectures. So there's an interaction between
awareness and action-and sometimes the steps you have to take to make
changes require taking things to the level of violent revolutionary struggle.
Like, if people in Haiti were in a position to overthrow the military there by
force, in my opinion they ought to do it. Sometimes it comes to that.
As to the c.d. demonstrations about nuclear weapons, just personally
speaking, I had a lot of disagreements with some of my friends on that, people I really respect a lot, like the people in Plowshares [a group active on disarmament issues]. I mean, I think these are all tactical questions--like, I don't think
there's any question of principle involved in whether you should smash a missile
nose-cone or not, it's not like a contract between you and God or something. The
question is, what are the effects? And there I thought the effects were negative. It
seemed to me that the effects of what they were doing were, first of all, to remove
them from political action, because they
were going to be in jail for twenty years, and also to tie up tons of money
and effort in courts, which is absolutely the worst place to be. I mean, the
worst waste of time and effort and money in the world is a court-so any
time you
can stay out of courts, you're well off. But the second thing is, I don't think
that they reached people-because they didn't prepare the ground for it.
Like, if you smash up a missile nose-cone in some town where people are
working at the missile plant and there's no other way they can make a
living,
and they haven't heard of any reason why we shouldn't have missiles, that
doesn't educate anybody, it just gets them mad at you.
So I think these tactical questions have to be very carefully thought
through-you can't really predict with much certainty, but as well as you can,
you have to make a guess as to what the effect of the tactic is going to be. If
the effect is going to be to build up awareness, that's good. But of course,
awareness is only the beginning, because people can be aware and still not
do anything-for instance, maybe they're afraid they'll lose their jobs. And
obviously you can't criticize people for worrying about that; they've got
kids, they've got to live. That's fair enough. It's hard to struggle for your
rights-you usually suffer.

188

Understanding Power
Leaders and Movements

WOMAN: As an activist, I think we also have an obligation to get across
the fact that we have fun doing this-that we get nurtured by working on
these issues which are close to our essence. If we're looking to the long
term, and building up the types of institutions you're talking about, we have
to project that a lot more than we do, almost as a way of recruitment. Too
often, people's image of "the activist" is of someone who's always burned
out. We have to create a culture that is engaging to people and exciting, so
that it doesn't just seem like we're putting in the hours and chanting radical
slogans.
See, I think the people who've really made social movements successful
have been the ones who did those things. They're gone from history of
course: none of the books mention them, nobody knows the names of the
people who really made the social movements in history work-but that's the
way it's always happened, I think.
And this is even true of the recent ones, like the anti-war movement in
the 1960s. So there are a lot of books coming out these days that tell you
what went on in the S.D.S. [Students for a Democratic Society] office, or
what one smart guy said to some other smart guy-but none of that had
anything to do with why the peace movement in the Sixties became a huge
mass movement. From my own personal experience in it, and that's only a
little piece of it obviously, I know who was doing the really important
things, and I remember them-like, I remember that this student worked
hard to set up that demonstration, and that's why I had a chance to talk
there; and they were bringing other people in to get involved; they were enjoying what they were doing, and communicating that to others somehow.
That's what makes popular movements work-but of course, that's all going
to be gone from history: what will be left in history is just the fluff on the
top.
MAN: I'm curious what you think about some of the more famous leaders
of change-like Martin Luther King or Mahatma Gandhi, for instance. You
don't ever seem to mention them when you speak. Why is that?
Well, let's take Martin Luther King. See, I think Martin Luther King was
an important person, but I do not think that he was a big agent of change. In
fact, I think Martin Luther King was able to playa role in bringing about
change only because the real agents of change were doing a lot of work.
And the real agents of change were people working at the grassroots level,
like S.N.C.C. [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] activists, for
example.
Look, part of the whole technique of disempowering people is to make
sure that the real agents of change fall out of history, and are never recog-

Chapter Six
189
nized in the culture for what they are. So it's necessary to distort history
and make it look as if Great Men did everything-that's part of how you
teach people they can't do anything, they're helpless, they just have to
wait for some Great Man to come along and do it for them.
But just take a look at the Civil Rights Movement in the United
States, for example-take, say, Rosa Parks [who triggered the 1955
Montgomery Bus Boycott protesting racial segregation]. I mean, the
story about Rosa Parks is, this courageous black woman suddenly
decided, "I've had enough, I'm not going to sit in the back of the bus."
Well, that's sort of half true-but only half. Rosa Parks came out of a
community, a wellorganized community, which in fact had Communist
Party roots if you trace it back, things like Highlander School [a
Tennessee school for educating political organizers] and so 00.6 But it
was a community of people who were working together and had
decided on a plan for breaking through the system of segregation-Rosa
Parks was just an agent of that plan.
Okay, that's all out of history. What's in history is, one person had the
courage to do something-which she did. But not on her own. Nobody
does anything on their own. Rosa Parks came out of an organized
community of committed people, people who'd been working together
for change for a very long time. And that's how it always works.
The same was true of Martin Luther King: he was able to appear and
give public speeches because S.N.C.C. workers and Freedom Riders
and others had prepared the ground-and taken a brutal beating for it.
And a lot of those people were pretty privileged kids, remember: they
chose it, they didn't have to do it. They're the Civil Rights Movement.
Martin Luther King was important because he could stand up there and
get the cameras, but these other people were the real Civil Rights
Movement. I'm sure he would have said the same thing too,
incidentally-or at least, he should have.
As for Gandhi, again it's the same story. He had a very mixed record,
actually-but the point is, it was the people on the ground who did the
work that prepared the basis for Gandhi to become prominent, and sort
of articulate things. And when you look at any other popular movement,
I think it's always like that.
Levels of Change
MAN: Noam, as we work to build up that kind of movement, what do you
think are the best methods we should be using as pressure tactics right
now? Should we be doing the traditional reformist kind of steps-lobbying
legislators, writing letters, trying to get Democrats into office-or should we
go with more of a direct action kind of approach, demonstrations and civil
disobedience and so on?

190

Understanding Power

Well, those are tactical decisions you have to make-the only people
qualified to make that kind of decision are the ones who live in a place, and
can see what's going on. So really it would be ridiculous for me to have an
opinion on it.
Demonstrations are often the right thing to do, you just have to make
tactical decisions-but keep in mind, they're just as reformist as lobbying
your legislature. And there's nothing wrong with that. I mean, even if you're
the most extreme revolutionary in the world, you're going to use whatever
methods are available to try to ameliorate things, and then if ultimately you
run into limits where powerful institutions will not permit more reform,
well, then you go beyond it. But first you have to reach those limits-and
there are many ways of reaching them. One way is lobbying your legislator,
one may be another political party, others are demonstrations--which
simply change the conditions under which powerful people make decisions.
But that does have an effect.
Let me just give you an example. There's a part of the Pentagon Papers
[the leaked official Defense Department planning record of U.S. involvement in Vietnam] which is considered politically incorrect-it doesn't appear
in big histories and nobody discusses it, because it's just too revealing. It's
the part that deals with the time right after the Tet Offensive. Right after the
Tet Offensive in 1968, everyone recognized that the Vietnam War was
going to take a long time, it wasn't going to be possible to win it quicklyso
major decisions had to be made about strategy and policy. Well, the Joint
Chiefs of Staff were asked by General Westmoreland, the top American
commander in Vietnam, to send 200,000 more troops over to the warand
they refused, they didn't want to do it. And the reason is, they said they
were afraid they might have to use the troops here in the United States to
put down a civil war: they said they were going to need the troops at home
for "civil disorder control," as they put it, and therefore they didn't want to
send them to Vietnam.7 These guys thought the society was going to crack
up in 1968, because people here were just too opposed to what they were
. doing.
In fact, the "civil disorder" was also one of the reasons why a group
called the "Wise Men" came to Washington with a lot of money in their
pockets, and shortly after, in an unusually blatant power-play, essentially
told President Johnson, "You're through: you're not running for reelection."
8 And he didn't. We started withdrawing from Vietnam, and we entered
into peace negotiations, and so on. Well, a lot of public protest here and
huge demonstrations and direct actions were a big part of the reason behind
that.
So, yes, demonstrations and resistance can have effects-but they're no
more revolutionary than talking to your legislator. They don't affect power,
they don't change the institutions of power, they just change the decisions
that will be made within those institutions. And that's a fine thing to do.
There's nothing wrong with that, it helps a lot of people. I mean, I don't

Chapter Six
191
think the institutions of power should exist either, but that's another question for right now.
MAN: What would you say are the most important causes for us to be focusing on, then-[ mean, what do you think can actually be done by activists
working today?
Well, everything can be done-everything can be done up to the point of
eliminating all structures of authority and repression: they're human institutions, they can be dismantled. If you ask what's most important at this
point-well, you know, that's not the kind of thing you just decide right on
the spot, those are decisions that come by serious thought and discussion in
groups like this, among people who are really trying to institute change.
I mean, you have to start with where the world is. Like, you don't start
by saying, "Okay, let's overthrow transnational corporations"-because right
now it's just not within range. So you start by saying, "Look, here's where
the world is, what can we begin to do?" Well, you can begin to do things
which will get people to understand better what the real source of power is,
and just how much they can achieve if they get involved in political
activism. And once you've broken through the pretense, you just construct
organizations-that's it. You work on the things that are worth working on. If
it's taking control of your community, it's that. If it's gaining control of your
workplace, it's that. If it's working on solidarity, it's that. If it's taking care
of the homeless, it's that.
With regard to the domestic scene, take the fact that the criminal justice
system increasingly is becoming a system for targeting the poor and minorities, who are being turned into people under military occupation. Look,
that's an easy one to change-you really just have to change public opinion
on that one. You aren't striking at the core of private power when you begin
to have a civilized criminal justice system instead of a brutal, barbaric one.
So that's an example of something I think is changeable. Or you could start
by getting us to stop torturing people in the Third World, right? Easy things
to do are, stop killing children in Cuba, stop massacring people in East
Timor, get people in the United States to realize that Palestinians are human
beings-those are easy things. So let's do those, first do the easy things.
On things like what's taking place in the international economy, you're
getting into harder territory-because there, crucial interests of authoritarian
institutions are at stake. And at that point, you're going to have to face the
fact, which sooner or later we're going to have to face after all, that maybe
the most totalitarian institution in human history-or certainly close to it-is a
corporation: it's a centrally-managed institution in which authority is
structured strictly from top to bottom, control is in the hands of owners and
investors, if you're inside the organization you take orders from above and
transmit them down, if you're outside it there are only ex-

192

Understanding Power

tremely weak popular controls, which indeed are fast eroding. And this isn't
some new insight of mine, incidentally-for example, it was pointed out by
Thomas Jefferson in his later years, which were only the early days of
corporations. Jefferson warned that if power was going to shift into the
hands of what he called "banking institutions and moneyed incorporations,"
then the democratic experiment would be over: we'd have a form of
absolutism worse than what the colonists had struggled against.9
Okay, Thomas Jefferson is not exactly a figure who's off the mainstream
spectrum in American history, so this is not some new off-the-wall insightit's as American as apple pie, and we should recognize what Thomas
Jefferson could see. But when you do recognize it, you realize it's a hard
nut to crack-because these are enormous agglomerations of power, indeed
concentrating, and indeed transnational, which are almost totally protected
from public scrutiny and popular participation. And that's just got to
change.
After all, why do corporations have the rights they do? Why are they
treated as "immortal persons," contrary to the warnings of people like
Adam Smith and others?10 It's not by nature-in fact, these rights weren't
even granted by Congress, this happened because of decisions made in
courts by judges and lawyers, which simply changed the world totally.11
So, if you ask what should be done: well, I don't think any sane human
being can look around at the world and not figure out things that have to be
done-take a walk through the streets, you'll find plenty of things that have
to be done. So you know, you get started doing them. But you're not going
to be able to do them alone. Like, if you take a walk down the streets and
say, "That ought to be done," nothing's going to happen. On the other hand,
if people become organized enough to act together, yeah, then you can
achieve things. And there's no particular limit to what you can achieve. I
mean, that's why we don't still have slavery.
MAN: Could you mention some specific organizations that we could try to
link up with and network with, which are doing a good job of working on
these problems?
Well, a lot of organizations are involved, from a lot of different points of
view. For example, at one level-which is important, though of course superficial-Ralph Nader's Public Citizen is involved [the group works primarily on consumer issues]. That's important, like I say, but not really
touching the basic structure of power.
Beyond that, if the American labor movement ever recovers the insights
that ordinary working people had a hundred years ago, then it will be
working on them too. So if you look back a hundred years-and even much
more recently than that, in fact-you'll find that the major goal of the labor
movement in the United States was achieving industrial democracy: placing
the workplace under democratic control.12 And it wasn't because they'd

Chapter Six
193
read Marx-people figured that out for themselves long before Marx: it was
just the natural response to industrial capitalism. And in fact, Marx didn't
say much about it anyway. So it could be the labor movement that's doing
it.
But there's a ton of activism going on around the country apart from
that-and though right now it's focused on pretty narrow issues, ultimately
the people are all talking about the same thing: illegitimate authority of one
form or another. I mean, if you want a list of organizations to contact, it's
easy to find-just write to any of the major progressive funding organizations, like Resist in Boston, for example, and they'll be delighted to give
you a list of the couple hundred groups they've funded in the last few years:
you'll find among them groups involved in any political cause you can
imagine.13 Also, in any major city there's typically some church which is a
coordinating center for all kinds of peace and justice activities-and you'll
find anything in the world there. That happens everywhere, and they'll be
thrilled if you help direct people to them.
Non-Violence
MAN: Mr. Chomsky, I've always hoped we could disassemble corporate
capitalism through non-violent yet very determined and organized resistance, and the creation of alternative institutions that could someday take
over and diffuse power peacefully. I'm wondering, do you think that kind of
hope for non-violence is at all realistic-and how do you feel about the use
of violence in general?
Well, like I say, nobody really knows anything much about tactics-at
least I don't. But I think you have to think through the non-violence question in detail. I mean, anybody is going to try to do things non-violently if
possible: what's the point of violence? But when you begin to encroach on
power, you may find that it's necessary to defend your rights-and defense of
your rights sometimes does require violence, then either you use it or you
don't, depending on your moral values.
So take a look at American labor history. Around the first half of this
century, hundreds of American workers were simply killed by security
forces, just for trying to organize.14 The United States has an unusually violent labor history, so violent in fact that if you read the right-wing British
press in the 1890s-the right-wing British press, like the London Times--they
just couldn't understand the brutality of the treatment of American workers
and their lack of rights.15 And it's not because the workers were trying to be
violent-it's because people with power were violently protecting their
power against people trying to get elementary rights.
Alright, if you're a pacifist or something, you have to ask yourself some
questions at that point: are people allowed to defend themselves by force

when they're attacked by force? Well, okay, people's values may differ on
that, but those are at least the questions.
My own opinion is that popular movements should try a lot of tactics,
but even things that are non-violent on their face could become violent. For
example, one thing that I think is important is the building of a political
party which could enter the political arena and represent the population,
not just business interests-I mean, it's certainly conceivable that there
could be a party like that in the United States. But if such a party ever got
any power, people with power in the society would defend themselves
against it. And at that point everyone's got to decide: do you use violence to
protect your rights or don't you? Look, violence usually comes from the
powerful-people may talk about it coming from the revolutionaries, but
that's typically because they're attacked and they then defend themselves
with violence.
The same question also arises with another thing that I think has to go on
now-the building up of alternative media, and of networks of activist
organizations which could help bring people together to fight the effects of
indoctrination, like we've been talking about. Again, that's non-violent--but
only up to the point where it starts to have the effect of undermining
corporate power, when then you may discover that it's not going to be nonviolent anymore, because the rich may find ways of defending themselves
with violence. So talking about non-violence is easy, but personally I can't
really see taking it as an absolute principle.
Now, of course, there are also ways of transcending violence. Like, if
enough people got together and took over a factory, let's say, the police
would try to stop them-but ultimately the police and soldiers are just other
people, and if understanding and solidarity were to spread enough, they
wouldn't stop them. So in a sense, one answer to your question just has to
be more solidarity, broader solidarity-so they can't bring in soldiers from
someplace else to smash people up. But that's going to be hard, we simply
have to face that-it's not just going to happen on its own. The fact that
societies today are so stratified and divided by hatreds means that elites
don't have to go very far away to bring in people who are willing to repress
you.
But that can change-in fact, it has to change, because there's a real limit
to how much popular movements can defend themselves with violence and
still maintain a popular-democratic character, in my opinion. To the extent
that the defense would require guns and warfare, I think that any
revolutionary developments would probably decline, and the chance of real
changes would likely be destroyed. So the hope ultimately lies in more
international solidarity, I think, and in the political appeal of what you're
doing to other people in this country, and elsewhere around the world as
well.

Chapter Six

195

Transcending Capitalism
MAN: Referring back to your comments about escaping from or doing
away with capitalism, I'm wondering what workable scheme you would put
in its place?
Me?
MAN: Or what would you suggest to others who might be in a position to
set it up and get it going?
Well, I think that what used to be called, centuries ago, "wage slavery" is
intolerable. I mean, I do not think that people ought to be forced to rent
themselves in order to survive. I think that the economic institutions ought
to be run democratically-by their participants, and by the communities in
which they live. And I think that through various forms of free association
and federalism, it's possible to imagine a society working like that. I mean,
I don't think you can lay it out in detail-no body's smart enough to design a
society; you've got to experiment. But reasonable principles on which to
build such a society are quite clear.
MAN: Most efforts at planned economies kind of go against the grain of
democratic ideals, and founder on those rocks.
Well, it depends which planned economies you mean. There are lots of
planned economies-the United States is a planned economy, for example. I
mean, we talk about ourselves as a "free market," but that's baloney. The
only parts of the U.S. economy that are internationally competitive are the
planned parts, the state-subsidized parts-like capital-intensive agriculture
(which has a state-guaranteed market as a cushion in case there are excesses); or high-technology industry (which is dependent on the Pentagon
system); or pharmaceuticals (which is massively subsidized by publicly-funded research). Those are the parts of the U.S. economy that are functioning well. 16
And if you go to the East Asian countries that are supposed to be the big
economic successes-you know, what everybody talks about as a triumph of
free-market democracy-they don't even have the most remote relation to
free-market democracy: formally speaking they're fascist, they're state-organized economies run in cooperation with big conglomerates. That's
precisely fascism, it's not the free market.
Now, that kind of planned economy "works," in a way-it produces at
least. Other kinds of command economies don't work, or work differently:
for example, the Eastern European planned economies in the Soviet era
were highly centralized, over-bureaucratized, and they worked very inefficiently, although they did provide a kind of minimal safety-net for people.

196

Understanding Power

But all of these systems have been very anti-democratic-like, in the Soviet
Union, there were virtually no peasants or workers involved in any decision-making process.
MAN: It would be hard to find a working model of an ideal .
Yes, but in the eighteenth century it would have been hard to find a
working model of a political democracy-that didn't prove it couldn't exist.
By the nineteenth century, it did exist. Unless you think that human history
is over, it's not an argument to say "it's not around." You go back two
hundred years, it was hard to imagine slavery being abolished.
The Kibbutz Experiment
ANOTHER MAN: How could you make decisions democratically without
a bureaucracy? I don't see how a large mass of people could actively participate in all of the decisions that need to be made in a complex modern
society.
No, I don't think they can-I think you've got to delegate some of those
responsibilities. But the question is, where does authority ultimately lie? I
mean, since the very beginnings of the modern democratic revolutions in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it's always been recognized that
people have to be represented-the question is, are we represented by, as
they put it, "countrymen like ourselves," or are we represented by "our
betters" ? 1 7
For example, suppose this was our community, and we wanted to enter
into some kind of arrangement with the community down the road-if we
were fairly big in scale, we couldn't all do it and get them all to do it, we'd
have to delegate the right to negotiate things to representatives. But then
the question is, who has the power to ultimately authorize those decisions?
Well, if it's a democracy, that power ought to lie not just formally in the
population, but actually in the population-meaning the representatives can
be recalled, they're answerable back to their community, they can be replaced. In fact, there should be as much as possible in the way of constant
replacement, so that political participation just becomes a part of everybody's life.
But I agree, I don't think it's possible to have large masses of people get
together to decide every topic-it would be unfeasible and pointless. You're
going to want to pick committees to look into things and report back, and
so on and so forth.18 But the real question is, where does authority lie?
MAN: It sounds like the model you're looking to is similar to that of the
kibbutzim [collective farming communities in Israel].

Chapter Six

197

Yeah, the kibbutz is actually as close to a full democracy as there is, I
think. In fact, I lived on one for a while, and had planned to stay there, for
precisely these reasons. On the other hand, life is full of all kinds of ironies,
and the fact is-as I have come to understand over the years even more than I
did at one time-although the kibbutzim are very authentic democracies
internally, there are a lot of very ugly features about them.
For one thing, they're extremely racist: I don't think there's a single Arab
on any kibbutz in Israel, and it turns out that a fair number of them have
been turned down. Like, if a couple forms between a Jewish member of a
kibbutz and an Arab, they generally end up living in an Arab village. The
other thing about them is, they have an extremely unpleasant relationship
with the state-which I didn't really know about until fairly recently, even
though it's been that way for a long time.
See, part of the reason why the kibbutzim are economically successful is
that they get a substantial state subsidy, and in return for that state subsidy
they essentially provide the officers' corps for the elite military units in Israel. So if you look at who goes into the pilot training schools and the
rangers and all that kind of stuff, it's kibbutz kids-that's the trade-off: the
government subsidizes them as long as they provide the Praetorian Guard.
Furthermore, I think they end up providing the Praetorian Guard in part as a
result of kibbutz education. And here there are things that people who believe in libertarian ideas, as I do, really have to worry about.
You see, there's something very authoritarian about the libertarian structure of the kibbutz-I could see it when I lived in it, in fact. There's tremendous group pressure to conform. I mean, there's no force that makes you
conform, but the group pressures are very powerful. The dynamics of how
this worked were never very clear to me, but you could just see it in operation: the fear of exclusion is very great-not exclusion in the sense of not
being allowed into the dining room or something, but just that you won't be
a part of things somehow. It's like being excluded from a family: if you're a
kid and your family excludes you-like maybe they let you sit at the table,
but they don't talk to you-that's devastating, you just can't survive it. And
something like that carries over into these communities.
I've never heard of anybody studying it, but if you watch the kids growing up, you can understand why they're going to go into the rangers and the
pilot programs and the commandos. There's a tremendous macho pressure,
right from the very beginning-you're just no good unless you can go
through Marine Corps training and become a really tough bastard. And that
starts pretty early, and I think the kids go through real traumas if they can't
do it: it's psychologically very difficult.
And the results are striking. For example, there's a movement of resisters
in Israel [Yesh G'vul], people who won't serve in the Occupied
Territories--but it doesn't have any kibbutz kids in it: the movement just
doesn't exist there. Kibbutz kids also have a reputation for being what are
called "good soldiers"-which means, you know, not nice people: do what
you gotta do.

198

Understanding Power

All of these things are other aspects of it, and the whole phenomenon
comes pretty much without force or authority, but because of a dynamics of
conformism that's extremely powerful.
Like, the kibbutz I lived in was made up of pretty educated people-they
were German refugees, and a lot of them had university degrees and so onbut every single person in the whole kibbutz read the same newspaper. And
the idea that you might read a different newspaper-well, it's not that there
was a law against it, it was just that it couldn't be done: you're a member of
this branch of the kibbutz movement, that's the newspaper you read.
MAN: Then how can we build a social contract which is cooperative in nature, but at the same time recognizes individual humanity? It seems to me
that there's always going to be a very tense polar pull there.
Where's the polar pull-between what and what?
MAN: Between a collective value and an individual value.
I guess I don't see why there has to be any contradiction there at all. It
seems to me that a crucial aspect of humanity is being a part of functioning
communities-so if we can create social bonds in which people find satisfaction, we've done it: there's no contradiction.
Look, you can't really figure out what problems are going to arise in
group situations unless you experiment with them-it's like physics: you
can't just sit around and think what the world would be like under such and
such conditions, you've got to experiment and learn how things actually
work out. And one of the things I think you learn from the kibbutz experiment is that you can in fact construct quite viable and successful
democratic structures-but there are still going to be problems that come
along. And one of the problems that people just have to face is the effect of
group pressures to conform.
I think everybody knows about this from families. Living in a family is a
crucial part of human life, you don't want to give it up. On the other hand,
there plainly are problems that go along with it-nobody has to be told that.
And a serious problem, which becomes almost pathological when it arises
in a close-knit group, is exclusion-and to avoid exclusion often means
doing things you wouldn't want to do if you had your own way. But that's
just a part of living, to be faced with human problems like that.
Actually, I'm not a great enthusiast of Marx, but one comment he made
seems appropriate here. I'm quoting, so pardon the sexist language, but
somewhere or other he said: socialism is an effort to try to solve man's animal problems, and after having solved the animal problems, then we can
face the human problems-but it's not a part of socialism to solve the
'~

"

Chapter Six

199

human problems; socialism is an effort to get you to the point where you
can face the human problems. And I think the kind of thing you're concerned about is a human problem-and those are going to be there. Humans
are very complicated creatures, and have lots of ways of torturing
themselves in their inter-personal relations. Everybody knows that, without
soap operas.
"Anarchism" and "Libertarianism"
WOMAN: Professor Chomsky, on a slightly different topic, there's a
separate meaning of the word "anarchy" different from the one you often
talk about-namely, "chaos."
Yeah, it's a bum rap, basically-it's like referring to Soviet-style bureaucracy as "socialism," or any other term of discourse that's been given a second meaning for the purpose of ideological warfare. I mean, "chaos" is a
meaning of the word, but it's not a meaning that has any relevance to social
thought. Anarchy as a social philosophy has never meant "chaos"-in fact,
anarchists have typically believed in a highly organized society, just one
that's organized democratically from below.
WOMAN: It seems to me that as a social system, anarchism makes such
bottom-line sense that it was necessary to discredit the word, and take it
out of people's whole vocabulary and thinking-so you just have a reflex of
fear when you hear it.
Yeah, anarchism has always been regarded as the ultimate evil by people
with power. So in Woodrow Wilson's Red Scare [a 1919 campaign against
"subversives" in the U.S.], they were harsh on socialists, but they murdered
anarchists-they were really bad news.
See, the idea that people could be free is extremely frightening to anybody with power. That's why the 1960s have such a bad reputation. I mean,
there's a big literature about the Sixties, and it's mostly written by intellectuals, because they're the people who write books, so naturally it has a very
bad name-because they hated it. You could see it in the faculty clubs at the
time: people were just traumatized by the idea that students were suddenly
asking questions and not just copying things down. In fact, when people
like Allan Bloom [author of The Closing of the American Mind] write as if
the foundations of civilization were collapsing in the Sixties, from their
point of view that's exactly right: they were. Because the foundations of
civilization are, "I'm a big professor, and I tell you what to say, and what to
think, and you write it down in your notebooks, and you repeat it." If you
get up and say, "I don't understand why I should read Plato, I think it's nonsense," that's destroying the foundations of civilization. But maybe it's a

200

Understanding Power

perfectly sensible question-plenty of philosophers have said it, so why isn't
it a sensible question?
As with any mass popular movement, there was a lot of crazy stuff
going on in the Sixties-but that's the only thing that makes it into history:
the crazy stuff around the periphery. The main things that were going on
are out of history-and that's because they had a kind of libertarian
character, and there is nothing more frightening to people with power.
MAN: What's the difference between "libertarian" and "anarchist," exactly?
There's no difference, really. I think they're the same thing. But you see,
"libertarian" has a special meaning in the United States. The United States
is off the spectrum of the main tradition in this respect: what's called "libertarianism" here is unbridled capitalism. Now, that's always been opposed
in the European libertarian tradition, where every anarchist has been a
socialist-because the point is, if you have unbridled capitalism, you have all
kinds of authority: you have extreme authority. If capital is privately
controlled, then people are going to have to rent themselves in order to
survive. Now, you can say, "they rent themselves freely, it's a free
contract"-but that's a joke. If your choice is, "do what I tell you or starve,"
that's not a choice-it's in fact what was commonly referred to as wage
slavery in more civilized times, like the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, for example.
The American version of "libertarianism" is an aberration, though-nobody really takes it seriously. I mean, everybody knows that a society that
worked by American libertarian principles would self-destruct in three seconds. The only reason people pretend to take it seriously is because you can
use it as a weapon. Like, when somebody comes out in favor of a tax, you
can say: "No, I'm a libertarian, I'm against that tax"-but of course, I'm still
in favor of the government building roads, and having schools, and killing
Libyans, and all that sort of stuff.
Now, there are consistent libertarians, people like Murray Rothbard
[American academic]-and if you just read the world that they describe, it's a
world so full of hate that no human being would want to live in it. This is a
world where you don't have roads because you don't see any reason why
you should cooperate in building a road that you're not going to use: if you
want a road, you get together with a bunch of other people who are going
to use that road and you build it, then you charge people to ride on it. If you
don't like the pollution from somebody's automobile, you take them to
court and you litigate it. Who would want to live in a world like that? It's a
world built on hatred.19
The whole thing's not even worth talking about, though. First of all, it
couldn't function for a second-and if it could, all you'd want to do is get ~
out, or commit suicide or something. But this is a special American aberration, it's not really serious.

Chapter Six

201

Articulating Visions
MAN: You often seem reluctant to get very specific in spelling out your vision of an anarchist society and how we could get there. Don't you think it's
important for activists to do that, though-to try to communicate to people a
workable plan for the future, which then can help give them the hope and
energy to continue struggling? I'm curious why you don't do that more
often.
Well, I suppose I don't feel that in order to work hard for social change
you need to be able to spell out a plan for a future society in any kind of detail. What I feel should drive a person to work for change are certain principles you'd like to see achieved. Now, you may not know in detail-and I
don't think that any of us do know in detail-how those principles can best be
realized at this point in complex systems like human societies. But I don't
really see why that should make any difference: what you try to do is
advance the principles. Now, that may be what some people call "reformism"-but that's kind of like a put-down: reforms can be quite revolutionary if they lead in a certain direction. And to push in that direction, I
don't think you have to know precisely how a future society would work: I
think what you have to be able to do is spell out the principles you want to
see such a society realize-and I think we can imagine many different ways
in which a future society could realize them. Well, work to help people start
trying them.
So for example, in the case of workers taking control of the workplace,
there are a lot of different ways in which you can think of workplaces being
controlled-and since nobody knows enough about what all the effects are
going to be of large-scale social changes, I think what we should do is try
them piecemeal. In fact, I have a rather conservative attitude towards social
change: since we're dealing with complex systems which nobody understands very much, the sensible move I think is to make changes and then
see what happens-and if they work, make further changes. That's true
across
the board, actually.
So, I don't feel in a position-and even if I felt I was, I wouldn't say it--to
know what the long-term results are going to look like in any kind of detail:
those are things that will have to be discovered, in my view. Instead, the
basic principle I would like to see communicated to people is the idea that
every form of authority and domination and hierarchy, every authoritarian
structure, has to prove that it's justified-it has no prior justification. For
instance, when you stop your five-year-old kid from trying to cross the
street, that's an authoritarian situation: it's got to be justified. Well, in that
case, I think you can give a justification. But the burden of proof for any
exercise of authority is always on the person exercising it-invariably. And
when you look, most of the time these authority structures have no justification: they have no moral justification, they have no justification in the
interests of the person lower in the hierarchy, or in the interests of other

202

Understanding Power

people, or the environment, or the future, or the society, or anything elsethey're just there in order to preserve certain structures of power and domination, and the people at the top.
So I think that whenever you find situations of power, these questions
should be asked-and the person who claims the legitimacy of the authority
always bears the burden of justifying it. And if they can't justify it, it's illegitimate and should be dismantled. To tell you the truth, I don't really
understand anarchism as being much more than that. As far as I can see, it's
just the point of view that says that people have the right to be free, and if
there are constraints on that freedom then got to justify them. Sometimes
you can-but of course, anarchism or anything else doesn't give you the
answers about when that is. You just have to look at the specific cases.
MAN: But if we ever had a society with no wage incentive and no
authority, where would the drive come from to advance and grow?
Well, the drive to "advance"-I think you have to ask exactly what that
means. If you mean a drive to produce more, well, who wants it? Is that
necessarily the right thing to do? It's not obvious. In fact, in many areas it's
probably the wrong thing to do-maybe it's a good thing that there wouldn't
be the same drive to produce. People have to be driven to have certain
wants in our system-why? Why not leave them alone so they can just be
happy, do other things?
Whatever "drive" there is ought to be internal. So take a look at kids:
they're creative, they explore, they want to try new things. I mean, why
does a kid start to walk? You take a one-year-old kid, he's crawling fine, he
can get anywhere across the room he likes really fast, so fast his parents
have to run after him to keep him from knocking everything down-all of a
sudden he gets up and starts walking. He's terrible at walking: he walks one
step and he falls on his face, and if he wants to really get somewhere he's
going to crawl. So why do kids start walking? Well, they just want to do
new things, that's the way people are built. We're built to want to do new
things, even if they're not efficient, even if they're harmful, even if you get
hurt-and I don't think that ever stops.
People want to explore, we want to press our capacities to their limits,
we want to appreciate what we can. But the joy of creation is something
very few people get the opportunity to have in our society: artists get to
have it, craftspeople have it, scientists. And if you've been lucky enough to
have had that opportunity, you know it's quite an experience-and it doesn't
have to be discovering Einstein's theory of relativity: anybody can have that
pleasure, even by seeing what other people have done. For instance, if you
read even a simple mathematical proof like the Pythagorean Theorem, what
you study in tenth grade, and you finally figure out what it's all about, that's
exciting-"My God, I never understood that before." Okay, that's creativity,
even though somebody else proved it two thousand years ago.

Chapter Six

203

You just keep being struck by the marvels of what you're discovering,
and you're "discovering" it, even though somebody else did it already. Then
if you can ever add a little bit to what's already known-alright, that's very
exciting. And I think the same thing is true of a person who builds a boat: I
don't see why it's fundamentally any different-I mean, I wish I could do
that; I can't, I can't imagine doing it.
Well, I think people should be able to live in a society where they can
exercise these kinds of internal drives and develop their capacities freelyinstead of being forced into the narrow range of options that are available to
most people in the world now. And by that, I mean not only options that are
objectively available, but also options that are subjectively available--like,
how are people allowed to think, how are they able to think? Remember,
there are all kinds of ways of thinking that are cut off from us in our
society-not because we're incapable of them, but because various blockages
have been developed and imposed to prevent people from thinking in those
ways. That's what indoctrination is about in the first place, in fact--and I
don't mean somebody giving you lectures: sitcoms on television, sports that
you watch, every aspect of the culture implicitly involves an expression of
what a "proper" life and a "proper" set of values are, and that's all
indoctrination.
So I think what has to happen is, other options have to be opened up to
people-both subjectively, and in fact concretely: meaning you can do
something about them without great suffering. And that's one of the main
purposes of socialism, I think: to reach a point where people have the opportunity to decide freely for themselves what their needs are, and not just
have the "choices" forced on them by some arbitrary system of power.
"Want" Creation
MAN: But you could say that "to truck and barter" is human nature-that
people are fundamentally materialist, and will always want to accumulate
more and more under any social structure.
You could say it, but there's no reason to believe it. You look at peasant
societies, they go on for thousands of years without it-do those people have
a different human nature? Or just look inside a family: do people "truck and
barter" over how much you're going to eat for dinner? Well, certainly a
family is a normal social structure, and you don't see people accumulating
more and more for themselves regardless of the needs of the other people.
In fact, just take a look at the history of "trucking and bartering" itself:
look at the history of modern capitalism, about which we know a lot. The
first thing you'll notice is, peasants had to be driven by force and violence
into a wage-labor system they did not want; then major efforts were under-

20
4

Understanding Power

taken-conscious efforts-to create wants. In fact, if you look back, there's a
whole interesting literature of conscious discussion of the need to manufacture wants in the general population. It's happened over the whole long
stretch of capitalism of course, but one place where you can see it very
nicely encapsulated is around the time when slavery was terminated. It's
very dramatic to look at cases like these.
For example, in 1831 there was a big slave revolt in Jamaica-which was
one of the things that led the British to decide to give up slavery in their
colonies: after some slave revolts, they basically said, "It's not paying anymore." So within a couple years the British wanted to move from a slave
economy to a so-called "free" economy, but they still wanted the basic
structure to remain exactly the same-and if you take a look back at the
parliamentary debates in England at the time, they were talking very consciously about all this. They were saying: look, we've got to keep it the way
it is, the masters have to become the owners, the slaves have to become the
happy workers-somehow we've got to work it all out.
Well, there was a little problem in Jamaica: since there was a lot of open
land there, when the British let the slaves go free they just wanted to move
out onto the land and be perfectly happy, they didn't want to work for the
British sugar plantations anymore. So what everyone was asking in Parliament in London was, "How can we force them to keep working for us, even
when they're no longer enslaved into it?" Alright, two things were decided
upon: first, they would use state force to close off the open land and prevent
people from going and surviving on their own. And secondly, they realized
that since all these workers didn't really want a lot of things-they just
wanted to satisfy their basic needs, which they could easily do in that tropical climate-the British capitalists would have to start creating a whole set
of wants for them, and make them start desiring things they didn't then desire, so then the only way they'd be able to satisfy their new material desires
would be by working for wages in the British sugar plantations.2o
There was very conscious discussion of the need to create wants-and in
fact, extensive efforts were then undertaken to do exactly what they do on
T.V. today: to create wants, to make you want the latest pair of sneakers
you don't really need, so then people will be driven into a wage-labor society. And that pattern has been repeated over and over again through the
whole entire history of capitalism.21 In fact, what the whole history of capitalism shows is that people have had to be driven into situations which are
then claimed to be their nature. But if the history of capitalism shows anything, it shows it's not their nature, that they've had to be forced into it, and
that that effort has had to be maintained right until this day.
Dissidents: Ignored or Vilified
MAN: Noam, if I can just change the topic a bit. You've been called a neoNazi, your books have been burned, you've been called anti-Israeli--don't

Chapter Six

205

you get a bit upset by the way that your views are always distorted by the
media and by intellectuals?
No, why should I? I get called anything, I'm accused of everything you
can dream of: being a Communist propagandist, a Nazi propagandist, a
pawn of freedom of speech, an anti-Semite, liar, whatever you want. 22 Actually, I think that's all a good sign. I mean, if you're a dissident, typically
you're ignored. If you can't be ignored, and you can't be answered, you're
vilified-that's obvious: no institution is going to help people undermine it.
So I would only regard the kinds of things you're talking about as signs of
progress.
And in fact, it's gotten a lot better since the 1960s. Again, we don't remember-younger people, in particular, don't appreciate-just how much it's
changed. Let me just give you an illustration. Boston's a pretty liberal city,
and the first major anti-Vietnam War action there was in October 1965, the
"International Days of Protest," it was called. There was a public
demonstration on the Boston Common-which is like Hyde Park, Union
Square, it's where you give talks-and I was supposed to be one of the
speakers. Well, the meeting was completely broken up: we never said one
word. There were thousands of counter-demonstrators, mostly students
marching over from the universities-and I was very pleased that there were
hundreds of cops there, otherwise we would have been lynched.
The media were just irate about the demonstration. The front page of the
Boston Globe had a big picture of a wounded war veteran on it, and the rest
of the page was all condemnations of these people who dared to get up and
say that we shouldn't bomb North Vietnam. All of the radio programs were
deluged with denunciations of these Communists and traitors. The liberals
in Congress denounced the "utter irresponsibility" of the demonstrators,
who were questioning the right of the United States to bomb North Vietnam-this was in 1965.23 Incidentally, I should say that those demonstrations
were so tepid it's embarrassing even to think about them-we weren't even
criticizing the attack on South Vietnam, which was much worse, we were
only talking about the extension of the bombing to the North.
The next big demonstration was in March '66, that was the second International Days of Protest. We figured there was no point in having a public demonstration, because we'd get killed, and we didn't want to have it at a
university because the university would probably get smashed to dust, so
we decided to have it in a church. So there was a march from Harvard
Square down to the Arlington Street Church in downtown Boston, the Unitarian Church which was kind of the center of the movement activities, and
the march was pretty well protected-guys on motorcycles were driving up
and back trying to keep people from getting slaughtered and so on. Finally
we got down to the church and went in: the church was attacked-there were
big mobs outside throwing projectiles, tomatoes, cans. I mean, the police
were there, and they were preventing people from getting killed, but they
weren't doing much more than that. That was in 1966.

206

Understanding Power

There's been a big change since then-a big, big change. All of that stuff
is inconceivable today, absolutely inconceivable.
MAN: What I'm struck with in each of the three major misunderstandings
that are used against you-the Faurisson affair [Chomsky made public
statements in 1979 and '80 that a French professor who denied the Holocaust should not be jailed for his writings by the French government, and
was denounced as a defender of the man's views24, your statements about
Cambodia [Chomsky compared the genocide in Cambodia to that in East
Timor, corrected numerous statistical falsifications about Cambodia, and
was labeled an apologist for Pol Pot25], and your stance on the
Israeli/Palestinian conflict 26 is how much your views have been distorted
and oversimplified by the press. I don't understand why you'd want to keep
bringing these ideas to the mass media when they always insist on misrepresenting them.
But why is that surprising? First of all, this is not happening in the mass
media, this is happening in the intellectual journals. And intellectuals are
specialists in defamation, they're basically commissars [Soviet officials responsible for political indoctrination ]-they're the ideological managers, so
they are the ones who feel the most threatened by dissidence. The mass
media don't care that much, they just ignore it, or say it's crazy or
something like that. In fact, this stuff barely enters the national media; sure,
you'll get a throwaway line saying, "this guy's an apologist for this that and
the other thing," but that's just feeding off the intellectual culture. The place
where it's really done is inside the intellectual journals-because that's their
specialty. They're commissars: it's not fundamentally different from the
Communist Party.
And also, I'm a particular target for other reasons-a lot of what I write is
a critique of the American liberal intellectual establishment, and they don't
like that particularly.
WOMAN: You also criticize Israel, right?
Yeah, the most sensitive of these issues has to do with the Middle East.
In fact, there are organizations which are just dedicated to defamation on
that issue. I mean, I didn't even get involved in writing about the Middle
East at first, although that was always my main interest since childhood,
partially for this reason-because they're very Stalinist-like, and I knew how
they worked from the inside. In fact, I was one of the people who was
doing it when I was a kid; you sort of get absorbed in this stuff, you know.
And they're just desperate to prevent discussion of the issues.
So for example, the Anti-Defamation League [of B'nai B'rith], which
masquerades as a civil rights organization, is in fact just a defamation organization. The office in Boston happens to be a rather leaky place, and I've

Chapter Six

207

been leaked a lot of stuff from there by people working in the office who
are just outraged by what goes on. For instance, they leaked me my file a
couple years ago-it had hundreds of pages of material, because whenever I
speak anywhere, they've got a spy working for them who's taking notes and
sending them back to some central office. So somebody will be here, say,
taking notes on what I'm saying, and some version of it will get into my file
and then be circulated around to their offices in the rest of the country:
there are intercepted communications, and fevered inter-office memos, "he
said so-and-so at such-and-such"-all kinds of schmutz, as they call it in my
culture ["schmutz" means "dirt" in Yiddish]P
But if any of you have ever looked at your F.B.I. file through a Freedom
of Information Act release, you've probably discovered that intelligence
agencies are in general extremely incompetent-that's one of the reasons why
there are so many intelligence failures: they just never get anything straight,
for all kinds of reasons. And part of it is because the information they get
typically is being transmitted to them by agents and informants who are
ideological fanatics, and they always misunderstand things in their own
crazy ways. So if you look at an F.B.I. file where you actually know what
the facts are, you'll usually see that the information has some relation to
reality-you can sort of figure out what they're talking about-but by the time
it's worked its way through the ideological fanaticism of the intelligence
system, there's been all sorts of weird distortion. And that's true of the AntiDefamation League's intelligence too.
But this stuff certainly is circulated around-like, probably somebody in
this area received it from the regional office, and there'll be some article in
the local newspaper tomorrow that'll pull a lot of junk out of the file, that's
what usually happens when I go places. And the point is that it's used to
close off the discussion: since they can't deal with the issues, they've got to
close off the discussion-and the best way to do it is by throwing enough
slime so that maybe people will figure, where there's smoke there's fire, so
we'd better not listen.
Well, the A.D.L. is an organized group where that's their main job. 28 But
there are plenty of others who do the same sort of thing-because this is really the institutional task of the whole intellectual community. I mean, the
job of mainstream intellectuals is to serve as a kind of secular priesthood, to
ensure that the doctrinal faith is maintained. So if you go back to a period
when the Church was dominant, the priesthood did it: they were the ones
who watched out for heresy and went after it. And as societies became
more secular in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the same controls
were needed: the institutions still had to defend themselves, after all, and if
they couldn't do it by burning people at the stake or sending them to
inquisitions anymore, they had to find other ways. Well, over time that
responsibility was transferred to the intellectual class-to be guardians of the
sacred political truths, hatchet-men of one sort or another.
So you see, as a dissident, you shouldn't be surprised to get all of this

208

Understanding Power

stuff done to you, it's in fact a positive sign-it means that you can't just be
ignored anymore.
WOMAN: You're really not discouraged by the fact that your work almost
never gets portrayed accurately to the public or reviewed in a serious way
by the press?
No, not at all-and we really shouldn't get discouraged by that kind of
thing. Look, I am not expecting to be applauded by people in editorial offices and at Faculty Clubs-that's not my audience. I mean, I was in India a
little while ago and visited rural self-governing villages, and the people
there were happy to see me. I was in Australia at the invitation of Timorese
refugees, and they were glad that I was trying to help them. Recently I gave
talks at a labor federation in Canada, and I've done that in the United States
often-those are the people that I want to talk to, they're the audience I'd like
to address.
Now, it's interesting and worth pointing out that the media in the United
States are different in this respect-I do get pretty easy access to national
media in other countries. In fact, it's only in the United States and the old
Soviet Empire that I haven't had any real access to the major media over the
years. And it's not just me, of course: the major media in the U.S., as was
the case in the former Soviet Empire, pretty much exclude anybody with a
dissident voice. So I can have interviews and articles in major journals and
newspapers in Western Europe, and in Australia, and all up and down the
Western Hemisphere. And often I get invitations from leading journals in
other countries to write for them-like, recently I had an article in Israel's
most important newspaper, Ha'aretz, which is kind of the equivalent of the
New York Times: it was an invited critique of their foreign policy, and of
the so-called "peace process." 29 Or in Australia, I gave a talk at the National Press Club in the Parliament Building, which was nationally
televised twice on Australian World Services, their version of the B.B.C-they wanted me to speak about Australia's foreign policy, so I gave a very
critical talk to a national audience, and I spoke to Parliamentarians and
journalists and so on, and was all over the press and papers there. And the
same thing is true in Europe; I'm often on the C.B.C. nationally in Canada;
and so on. Well, as you say, that's all unheard of in the United States-and
the main reason, I think, is just that what people think, and are allowed to
think, is much more important here, so the controls are much greater.30
MAN: I heard something vaguely about your books being burned In
Canada once. Were you there? What was that like for you?
That was in Toronto. Yeah, I was there. I mean, I think people have a
right to burn books if they want. I was in fact interviewed about it, I said
the obvious thing-I'd rather they read them than burn them, but if they

Chapter Six

209

want to burn them, I don't care. Actually, you don't really have to worry
about burning books-burning books is virtually impossible. Books are like
bricks: they're very hard to burn.
MAN: Was that a popular rabble or something? How did it happen?
It was actually Vietnamese refugees. There's a Vietnamese refugee community that heard, or decided, or whatever, that I was ... I don't know what.
It was impossible to find out what they'd heard. They obviously knew that I
was against the Vietnam War, and they were obviously very pro-war-you
know, they thought the Americans should have stayed in and won it, that's
why they're Vietnamese refugees. So they burned the books-which is fine,
it's a reasonable form of protest. Now, if the government burns books, that's
a different story, or if a corporation burns books, that's a different story.
In fact, just as an aside, I should say that I've had much worse destruction of books than that. You know how there's been all this business all
over the front pages recently about big media mega-mergers, and there's all
kinds of thoughtful discussion about whether this is going to harm the freedom of the press and so on? I really have to laugh. The first book that Ed
Herman and I wrote together was published in 1974 by a rather profitable
textbook publisher which happened to be owned by Warner Communications. Well, one of the executives at the corporation [William Sarnoff]
didn't like the advertising copy that he saw about it, and he asked to see the
book-and he was horrified by the book, and wouldn't let the publisher
distribute it. Then came a long hassle, in which the people who ran the publishing company tried to insist on their right to publish, and in the end
Warner Communications just put the publisher out of business, they decided that the easiest way to deal with the situation was just to terminate
them. That meant that not only was our book destroyed, but everybody's
books were destroyed. That does the Ayatollah one better: that's way beyond burning a book, that's destroying every book by this publisher to prevent one particular book, which had already been printed, from being
distributed.31 Now, that I would regard as much more serious than a number of people burning a book for symbolic reasons. If they want to do that,
fine.
WOMAN: How significant do you think these media mega-mergers really
are in the end?
Well, the first chapter of our book Manufacturing Consent does talk a bit
about the corporate concentration of the media-and that part actually was
written by Ed Herman, who's a specialist in corporate control; I didn't have
anything to do with it. But my own feeling is that that particular issue is not
quite as important as it's sometimes made out to be. I mean, if there

210

Understanding Power

were fifty media corporations instead of three, for example, I think they'd
do about the same thing they do now-just because they all have basically
the same interests. Maybe there'd be a little bit more competition, but probably not much. That's my view of the question, at least.
MAN: Have you ever had your linguistics work censored or impeded in
publication because of your politics?
Never in the United States-but in the rest of the world, sure. For instance, I'll never forget one week, it must have been around 1979 or so,
when I was sent two newspapers: one from Argentina and one from the Soviet Union. Argentina was then under the rule of these neo-Nazi generals,
and I was sent La Prensa from Buenos Aires, the big newspaper in Argentina-there was a big article saying, "You can't read this guy's linguistics
work because it's Marxist and subversive." The same week I got an article
from Izvestia in the Soviet Union which said, "You can't read this guy's
linguistics work because he's idealist and counter-revolutionary." I thought
that was pretty nice.
MAN: Noam, aren't you at all afraid of being silenced by the establishment
for being so prominent and vocal in speaking out against U.S. power and
its abuses?
No, not really-and for a very simple reason, actually: if you look at me,
you'll see what it is. I'm white, I'm privileged, and that means I'm basically
immune from punishment by power. I mean, I don't want to say that it's a .
hundred percent immunity-but the fact of the matter is that these two things
mean that you can buy a lot of freedom.
Look, there isn't any true capitalist society in the world, it couldn't survive
for ten minutes, but there are variations on capitalism, and the U.S. is
towards the capitalist end of the world spectrum-not very far towards it, I
should say, but towards it at least in values. And if you had a truly capitalist society, everything would be a commodity, including freedom: there
would be as much of it as you can buy. Well, since the U.S. is towards that
end of the spectrum, it means there's an awful lot of freedom around if you
can afford it. So if you're a black organizer in the ghetto, you don't have
much of it, and you're in trouble-they can send the Chicago police in to
murder you, like they did with Fred Hampton [a Black Panther assassinated
by the EB.I. in 1969]. But if you're a white professional like me, you can
buy a lot of freedom.
And beyond that, I also happen to belong to a sector of the society where
those who have real power are going to want to protect me-I mean, they
may hate everything about me and want to see me disappear, but they don't
want the state to be powerful enough to go after people like me, because
then it could go after people like them. So the fact of the matter is that in
so-

Chapter Six

211

cieties like ours, privileged people like me are pretty well protected. It's not
a hundred percent, but there's a lot of leeway around.
Teaching About Resistance
WOMAN: Do you have any thoughts about how best to begin helping
people understand some of these ideas-like about the media institutions
and how they prevent people from thinking freely for themselves?
Well, I don't think any of it's very hard, to tell you the honest truth-I
mean, intellectuals make a career of trying to make simple things look hard,
because that's part of the way you get your salary paid and so on. But the
fact of the matter is, the social world-to the extent that we understand it at
all-is more or less right there in front of you after you sort of peel away the
blinders a little. It's an extremely hard thing to understand if you're all alone
trying to do it, but through the kinds of interactions and groups we've been
talking about, you can do it pretty easily.
So when you have a chance to meet with people or talk with them, I
think the thing to do is to try to get them to learn how to explore things for
themselves-for example, to help them learn for themselves the way that the
media shape and frame issues for the purpose of manipulation and control.
Now, there's not much point in doing it abstractly-you know, like some
theory of how it works. What you have to do is look at cases. So take cases
that people are interested in, and just teach them how to do research
projects-research projects are very easy to do, you don't need a Ph.D.;
maybe in physics you do, but not in these topics. You just have to have
common sense. You have to have common sense, you have to look
carefully at the facts; it may be a little bit of work to find the facts-like
usually you're not just going to find them right there in the headlines or
something. But if you do a little work, you can find out what the facts are,
you can find out the way they're being distorted and modified by the
institutions. And then the purposes of those distortions quickly become
clear.
MAN: It's hard to know the best way to stimulate people's interest as a
teacher or an organizer, but certainly there are ways of not doing it, even
while appearing to do it. Earlier, in response to the question about civil disobedience, you mentioned people lecturing on resistance-that would seem
to me to be an example of not doing it, while pretending to do it.
Well, I'm not so convinced that that's not a way to do it, actually. Like, I
think there are things to teach people about resistance-I've personally liked
to listen to people who have had experiences with it, and who may have
ideas about it that I don't have. If you want to call that "lecturing," okay-but
it's not necessarily wrong: there are lots of things you

212

Understanding Power

can learn from other people who have thought about subjects and had
experiences.
MAN: But what I'm wondering is, what else do you think would go into
teaching people about resistance, and activism in general?
First of all I don't think you should mislead people: you should get them
to understand that if they're going to be independent thinkers, they are
probably going to pay a cost. I mean, one has to begin with an understanding of the way the world works: the world does not reward honesty and independence, it rewards obedience and service. It's a world of concentrated
power, and those who have power are not going to reward people who
question that power. So to begin with, I don't think anybody should be misled about that.
After you understand that, okay, then you make your own choices. If
your choice is that you want to be independent anyhow, even though you
recognize what's involved, then you should just go ahead and try to do itbut
those can be extremely hard choices sometimes. For instance, I know that
as an older person who often gets approached by younger people for
advice, I'm always very hesitant to give it on these sorts of decisions (even
though sometimes the circumstances are such that I have to)-because I'm in
no position to tell anybody else what to decide. But what I think one can do
is to help people understand what the objective realities are.
Look, you can gain a lot by activism, like all of you were saying earlierbut there are also many things that you can lose. And some of those things
are not unimportant, like security for example-that's not unimportant. And
people just have to make their own choices about that when they decide
what they're going to do.
Isolation

,

WOMAN: To stay on a personal level for a moment, Noam, I've always
been kind of fascinated by how you find the time to write books and articles, and teach, give talks all over the country, have a family life, be the
leading figure in linguistics, you document your work very thoroughly-are
you in some kind of a time warp, where you experience something other
than a 24-hour day like the rest of us?
No, it's just pure, ordinary fanaticism-and in fact, a lot of things go.
Anybody who's pretty seriously involved in political activity or organizing
knows that a lot of other things just go, like personal lives sometimes. I
mean, yeah, I try to keep my personal life going-so my grandkids and children were over a few nights ago, and I played with them, that sort of thing.
But personal relationships do suffer. For instance, if I see my closest per-

Chapter Six

213

sonal friends, whom I've known for fifty years, we're extremely close and
so on, once or twice a year, it's a good year. But that's the way it goes: you
can't do everything, so you just have to make choices.
Actually, it was kind of striking to watch it during the Sixties-all of a
sudden a lot of people really threw themselves into activism, and when I
think about it, very few of the couples made it through. Very few. Not because they hated each other or anything-it was just that it was too much of
an emotional burden, even if both of them were involved, and something
snaps. In fact, it was like a tidal wave right through that period, particularly
after some of the big political trials. So couples would stick together for as
long as the trial was going on, and immediately afterwards get divorced-it
was just too much. And that's a reflection of what tends to happen in general when you get really seriously involved.
I mean, it's extremely hard to lead a deeply committed life in several different areas and have them all work. Some of them give, and one of the
ones that gives often is personal life-and that's hard to deal with, because
you just can't go on that way. I don't really know what the answer is to that,
actually; people have found different answers.
MAN: It's comforting for me that you experience the same thing.
Oh, everybody does.
MAN: I feel very isolated when I get so involved in activism that my personal life becomes nonexistent-I really feel a void, not connecting with
people.
Oh yeah, it's a terrible void-and it then makes it impossible for you to
work. After all, we're not automata: we function as part of a matrix of
human relations, and need to connect with other people.
MAN: And the personal isolation then reinforces the political isolation.
It's tough, yeah. I mean, partly the problem is a result of the fact that
we're all so isolated: if we had live, ongoing popular organizations, this
wouldn't be so true. The history of the labor movement in the United States
is interesting in this respect, actually: when people were really working together organizing, that overcame the isolation. In fact, it even overcame
things like racism and sexism to a great extent. And this goes way back.
I mean, about a century ago in the United States, the labor movement
was getting smashed all over the place: they were only defeated, there were
no victories. But in the course of those defeats-things like, say, the Homestead strike [an 1892 strike at a Carnegie Steel plant in Pennsylvania]-it's
amazing what happened. Homestead's an interesting case, actually, because
it was a working-class town, and the strikers simply took the place over:

214

Understanding Power

they took over the town and ran everything. And this was during a very
racist period, remember-there weren't a lot of blacks around right there, but
there was real racism directed at Eastern Europeans. So, what were called
"Huns" (which could be Slovaks or anybody, it didn't have to be
Hungarians) were treated sort of the way blacks are treated-and the racism
was very vicious. But it all collapsed in the middle of the Homestead strike.
And also, women were running all sorts of things too, a lot of the sexism
was broken down as well. And that's what tends to happen when people
join together in common struggles.32
It also happened in the formation of the c.I.O. [a union for massproduction industries formed in 1935]-black and white workers worked
together to create the c.I.O. And it happened in the Civil Rights MovementS.N.C.C., for example, was very open, it was white, black, anything. A lot
of the unpleasant aspects of life disappear, and you can compensate for
them, in the course of some kind of common struggle. In fact, an old friend
of mine who was in the Polish resistance in Warsaw during the Nazi
occupation-and lived through that time and survivedalways used to say that
it was the best period of his life. I mean, it was extremely dangerous-you
could end up in a gas chamber and everybody knew it-but there was a sense
of community that he'd never felt before, and never had after.
So the best answer, I suspect, is just the same as for everything else-we
have to develop stable popular organizations, and a culture of concern, and
commitment, and activism, and solidarity, which can help to sustain us in
these struggles, and which can help break down some of the barriers that !
have been set up to divide and distract us.
Science and Human Nature
MAN: Noam, could you elaborate a little more on what your own opinions
are about human nature-for instance, do you see humans as more destructive than constructive, or is it maybe the other way around?
Well, first of all, my opinion about it is no better than yours: it's just
pure intuition, nobody really understands anything about human nature.
Look, people don't understand much about big molecules-when you get
beyond that to things like human nature, anybody's guess is as good as
anyone else's.
MAN: But you've studied a lot of the results of human nature.
Yeah, but if you look at the results of human nature, you see everything:
you see enormous self-sacrifice, you see tremendous courage, you see integrity, you see destructiveness, you see anything you want. That doesn't
tell you much.

Chapter Six

215

MAN: It seems like a great deal of your research documents the
destructive nature of humans, though.
Well, but a lot of it documents other things too. I mean, my general feeling is that over time, there's measurable progress: it's not huge, but it's significant. And sometimes it's been pretty dramatic. For instance, take the
sort of "original sin" of American history-what happened to the native
population here. It's a remarkable fact that until the 1960s, the culture simply could not come to terms with that at all. Until the 1960s, with very rare
exceptions, academic scholarship was grossly falsifying the history, and
suppressing the reality of what happened-even the number of people killed
was radically falsified. I mean, as late as 1969, in one of the leading
diplomatic histories of the United States, the author Thomas Bailey could
write that after the American Revolution, the former colonists turned to the
task of "felling trees and Indians." 33 Nobody could say that now-you
couldn't even say that in a Wall Street Journal editorial now. Well, those
are important changes, and it's part of a lot of other significant progress too.
Slavery was considered a fine thing not long ago.
MAN: So you think that human nature is individually kind of destructive,
but overall it's constructive?
I don't know-like, they didn't have gas chambers in the nineteenth century, so you can find all kinds of things. And if you want to look for scientific answers, it's zilch, nobody knows a thing: the answers mostly come
from history or intuition or something. I mean, science can only answer
very simple questions-when things get complicated, you just guess.
ANOTHER MAN: People often ask you about the connections between
your scientific work in linguistics and your politics, and you tend to say
something about, "Yes, there are a few tenuous connections." Would you
amplify on that? I myself have been thinking that maybe part of our
political problem is that the human brain is very good at seeing things in
competitive terms like "more" and "less," and it's not very good at
conceptualizing "enough."
Well, that may be true-but these are topics where the scientific study of
language has nothing to say. I mean, you know as much about it as the fanciest linguist around.
MAN: Where are they, then-even the tenuous connections?
Not there; the tenuous connections are somewhere else.
First of all, we should remember that the kinds of things that any sort of
science can shed light on are pretty narrow: when you start moving to complicated systems, scientific knowledge declines very fast. And when you
get

216

Understanding Power

to the nature of human beings, the sciences have nothing to say. There are a
few areas where you can get a lot of insight and understanding, and certain
aspects of language happen to be one of those areas, for some reason-but
that insight still doesn't bear on questions of real human concern, at least
not at a level which has any consequences for human life.
The connections are quite different-and they are tenuous. The only
reason for stressing them is because they've been pointed out many times
through the course of modern intellectual history, and in fact they lie right
at the core of classical liberalism. I mean, contrary to the contemporary version of it, classical liberalism (which remember was pre-capitalist, and in
fact, anti-capitalist) focused on the right of people to control their own
work, and the need for free creative work under your own control-for
human freedom and creativity. So to a classical liberal, wage labor under
capitalism would have been considered totally immoral, because it frustrates the fundamental need of people to control their own work: you're a
slave to someone else.
Well, in trying to locate sort of a core in human nature for a right to free,
creative work and control over it, some classical liberal philosophers
looked at other aspects of human intelligence, and one aspect that had indeed been studied since the seventeenth century, and had a lot to do with
Cartesian thought as well [i.e. after the French philosopher Descartes], was
language-where it was recognized, quite accurately, that sort of an identifying criterion of possession of a mind in the human sense (as distinct from
an animal or an automaton) is the free creative aspect of the normal use of
language.
So for example, a central part of Descartes' argument for a sharp, even
ontological distinction between humans and everything else in the world
was that if you pose a question to a human being about a new topic using
phrases that the person has never heard before, they can give you a new response relevant to what you said, which is not caused by their internal state
and not caused by any external circumstances, but which somehow comes
out of some creative capacity of their mind. But the same thing won't be
true of an automaton or an animal or anything else-like, if you take a machine and set it in a certain environment and push a button, what will come
out is predetermined; or if you give a pigeon a certain stimulus, its actions
also are going to be predetermined. But in human language, the product
that comes out is not predetermined-it's undetermined, but still somehow
appropriate to situations.
Well, to Descartes, that was the crucial aspect of the human mind. And
there was an attempt right through the classical liberal period, by Rousseau,
and Humboldt, and others, to link up these elements and identify sort of a
need and a right to freedom, an "instinct for freedom," it was sometimes
called, something at the cognitive core of human nature: free creative
thought and its expression.
Now, that's pretty metaphoric-like I say, nobody really knows any-

Chapter Six

217

thing about human nature, so certainly you don't know whether there's an
instinct for freedom or not. I mean, if somebody wants to say that humans
are born to be slaves, they can give as much of a scientific argument as
Rousseau could when he said they're born to be free-it's like where your
hopes are, it's not that there's any scientific knowledge.
And the same thing is true today: like, you can read any book you want
about sociobiology [theory that specific social behaviors and not just physical characteristics result from evolution], and it's mostly just fairy tales-I
mean, it's all fine when it's talking about ants; when it goes up to the level
of mammals, it starts being guesswork; and when it gets to humans, it's
like, say anything that comes to your head. But I think you can see a
possible connection of that sort-a potential connection. Whether that
connection can actually be made substantive, who knows? It's all so far
beyond scientific understanding at this point that you can't even dream
about it. So that's the main reason why I don't talk about these things much.
I just think they're interesting ideas, which are maybe worth thinking about
in the back of your mind, or maybe writing poems about or something. But
they're simply not topics for scientific inquiry at this point.
Charlatans in the Sciences
WOMAN: Noam, there's an idea in behavioral science, tied in with
Piaget's theory of cognitive development, that human compassion is a
learned quality [the Swiss psychologist Piaget believed that mental
development in children progresses through four genetically-determined
stages}. Some politicians have seized upon this idea to promote the death
penalty being used more often: like, either you catch the boat or you don't,
either you learn human compassion or you don't-so if these murderers
haven't learned it, well, then it's impossible to teach it to them now. I'm
sure you're familiar with these arguments?
This stuff doesn't even rise to the level of idiocy-literally. I mean, if people want to have a fraudulent reason for defending the death penalty, fine,
but there is no scientific basis. Take Piaget: Piaget's work on developmental
psychology was interesting, he had some interesting experiments and so onthe whole edifice has totally collapsed, nobody believes a word of it
anymore. It turned out that all of the developmental "stages" are false: as
you got better experiments, you could show that tiny infants could do all
the things he postulated they couldn't do at that stage. I mean, it was an interesting set of ideas, it wasn't stupid-and people learned from the experimental work. But there's nothing left of the picture. Zero.
As far as compassion being learned, anyone of you knows as much as
the fanciest scientist-and what you know is what you know by intuition and
experience: you've seen children, maybe you've had children, you've

218

Understanding Power

played with them, you see the way they grow up. That's what anybody
knows, nobody knows any more than that. And the sciences have nothing
more to tell you-and furthermore, there's no indication that they ever will:
it's just way too far away. I mean, they may give you some statistical evidence, or maybe someday somebody will be able to show that this kind of
background leads to more compassionate people than some other kind of
background, that's entirely possible. But that doesn't mean there's ever
going to be an understanding of it.
Look, as science progresses, there will be attempts to draw political conclusions from it-but they're going to be like this Piaget and the death
penalty thing: that is, people who have some political agenda will find
some total charlatan in the sciences who will tell them, "this is the basis for
it." But in terms of actual scientific knowledge, we aren't even within
super-telescope distance of touching any of these questions-there's just
nothing there. I mean, it's not that you can't do research on them: you can
do descriptive research, you can do therapy, you can try to extend insights
by making them a little bit more careful and controlled-but that's about it.
It's kind of like psychotherapy: some people say they get something out
of psychotherapy, and maybe they do and maybe they don't-but if they do,
it's not because there's any science behind it: there's no science behind it,
any more than there is behind faith-healing. It's just that somehow, various
kinds of human interactions sometimes seem to work.
I remember an anthropologist friend of mine who's worked in Southwest
American Indian communities once described to me people being healed in
tribal healing ceremonies: he said that if he didn't see it with his own eyes,
he wouldn't have believed it. So some person will be really ill-I mean, very
serious problems, physical symptoms, he's not making it up-and they will
go through some community-type ritual which involves dancing, and
singing, this and that and the other thing, and the person just gets better:
you see it happening, nobody knows why it's happening; maybe it's something about empathy, or being part of a community, whatever it might be.
Well, there's about as much scientific understanding in that as there is in
psychotherapy.
Or even just take narrow questions of medicine. You know how they decide what kinds of drugs are worth giving to you, say for heart problems?
It's not because the science of it is understood-they just do epidemiological
studies with controlled populations, to see if one of the sample populations
takes this drug and the other sample population takes that drug, which one
lives a little bit longer. I mean, you can call that "science" if you like-but
it's the kind of science that can be done by anybody who can count
basically, or who knows something about studying samples and things like
that. It's not because anyone understands the biology of these things-usually
that's barely understood, if at all.
So I think that whenever you hear people talking about things like
"learning of compassion" and so on, a big red flag should go up.

Chapter Six

219

WOMAN: You don't think science will ever have much to say about
human behavior-there's just something spiritual at the human level that is
undefinable by science?
It's not just about humans that scientific insight is very limited-even
simple physical things can't be dealt with either. For instance, there's a
"three body problem" in physics: you can't really figure out what happens
when three bodies are moving, the equations are just too complicated. In
fact, a physicist I was talking to recently gave me another example-he said
if you take a cup of coffee with cream swirling around in it, presumably all
of the natural laws are known, but you can't solve the equations because
they're just too complex. Alright, that's not human beings, that's cream
swirling around in a cup of coffee: we can't figure out what's going on.
The point is, we may know the laws, but the possibility of applying
them, or of solving the equations, or of working out the problems, or of understanding what's going on, declines very fast when we get past only the
very simplest things.
Also, we probably don't know all the laws-I mean, it's very unlikely that
we really do know the laws, even at the core of science. A physicist will tell
you much more about this than I can, but take, say, the matter in the
universe: more than 90 percent of the matter in the universe is what's called
"dark matter"-and it's called "dark" because nobody knows what it is. It's
just sort of postulated that it exists, because if you don't postulate it,
everything blows up-so you have to assume that it's there. And that's over
90 percent of the matter in the universe: you don't even know what it is. In
fact, a new branch of physics has developed around superconductivity
["superconductivity" refers to the complete disappearance of electrical resistance in various solids at ultra-low temperatures], and while I don't have
the knowledge to evaluate the claims, what some of the physicists working
on it say is that they can now virtually prove (I mean, not quite prove, but
come quite close to proving) that in this domain of highly condensed matter, there are principles which are literally not deducible from the known
laws of nature: so you can't reduce the principles of superconductivity to
the known laws of nature. And again, that's talking about really simple
things, nothing like a complex organism.
Then when you begin to talk about how organisms develop-well, people
say it's "natural selection," and that's not false: undoubtedly Darwin was
sort of right. But it could be that natural selection is only a very peripheral
part of the development of organisms. So, there's a channel of physical
possibilities that physical laws make available, and within that channel of
physical possibilities only certain things can happen-and within the range of
those things that can happen, you are going to get effects due to natural
selection. But the structure of the channel is totally unknown: I mean,
nobody knows what kinds of laws apply to complex organisms, there are
just the bare beginnings these days of the studies of

220

Understanding Power

self-organizing systems-how systems develop structure and complexity just
by virtue of their nature. These things are just barely beginning to be
understood-and we're talking about things way simpler than human beings.
For instance, in neurophysiology, the organism that people study is a little worm called nematodes-and the reason they study nematodes is because
they're tiny, for one thing: they have a thousand cells, a three-day gestation
period, three hundred neurons, and the entire wiring diagram of the three
hundred neurons is known, so we know exactly how they're all linked up
together. But still, nobody can figure out why the stupid worm does what it
does, whatever it does-I don't know, probably turn left or something.
Whatever it does is so far unexplained on the basis of a three-hundredneuron system, where the entire structure of it is known, and the whole
gestation period is completely known. It's just too complicated, too many
things are going on, there are too many chemical interactions. And this is
three hundred neurons-it's not 1011 neurons, like in your head. So the
difference is just so qualitatively huge that the fall-off in understanding
when it comes to human beings is extremely dramatic.
And this is again why the study of language is so particularly interesting,
because for some reason it seems like things in the inorganic world: there
are aspects of it you can study by the methods of the sciences, which is
curious-but still it's like a little laser beam of light that goes through human
behavior, leaving most things about language out. Like, science has nothing
to say about what you and I are doing now-only about the mechanisms that
are involved in it, not about how we do it. About that, there's nothing to say,
except again you can write poems. So the reach of scientific understanding
is highly specific: very deep in the few areas where it goes, but they're
limited areas.
Now, when you say that human behavior might be beyond our inquiry,
that's possible-but I wouldn't say that's because of a "spiritual" property we
have: the same thing might be true of large parts of nature. So there's some
capacity of the brain, some faculty of the mind that nobody understands,
which allows us to do scientific inquiry-and like any other part of biology,
it's highly structured: it's very good at certain things, and consequently very
bad at other things. I mean, you can't be good at something if you're not bad
at something else, those two things necessarily go together-like, if you're a
great weight-lifter, you're going to be a rotten butterfly. You can't be both,
right? So if a human embryo can become a human being, it can't become a
fly-it's too "weak" to become a fly, if you like, because it's "strong" enough
to become a human being: by a matter of logic, those things go together. So
if you have a great capacity in one area, you're going to have lousy
capacities in another area. And if the human scienceforming capacity is
good enough to figure out quantum theory for some completely
unexplained reason, it's also going to be so bad that it's not going to figure
out lots of other things. And we don't know what those

MAN: You said that classical liberalism was "anti-capitalist." What did you
mean by that?
Chapter Six
221
other things are-but they might very well be most everything that we're really interested in.
So when someone comes along claiming a scientific basis for some
social policy or anything else having to do with human beings, I'd be very

Adam Smith: Real and Fake
skeptical if I were you-because the knowledge just isn't there right now,
and may never be, either.
Well, the underlying, fundamental principles of Adam Smith and other
classical liberals were that people should be free: they shouldn't be under
the control of authoritarian institutions, they shouldn't be subjected to
things like division of labor, which destroys them. So look at Smith: why
was he in favor of markets? He gave kind of a complicated argument for
them, but at the core of it was the idea that if you had perfect liberty,
markets would lead to perfect equality-that's why Adam Smith was in
favor of markets.34 Adam Smith was in favor of markets because he
'
thought that people ought to be completely equal-completely equal-and
that was because, as a classical liberal, he believed that people's fundamental character involves notions like sympathy, and solidarity, the right to
control their own work, and so on and so forth: all the exact opposite of
capitalism.
In fact, there are no two points of view more antithetical than classical
liberalism and capitalism-and that's why when the University of Chicago
publishes a bicentennial edition of Smith, they have to distort the text
(which they did): because as a true classical liberal, Smith was strongly opposed to all of the idiocy they now spout in his name.
So if you read George Stigler's introduction to the bicentennial edition o~
The Wealth of Nations-it's a big scholarly edition, University of Chicago
Press, so it's kind of interesting to look at-it is diametrically opposed to
Smith's text on point after point.35 Smith is famous for what he wrote about division of
labor: he's supposed to have thought that division of labor was a great thing. Well, he
didn't: he thought division of labor was a terrible thing-in fact, he said that in any
civilized society, the government is going to have to intervene to prevent division of
labor from simply destroying people. Okay, now take a look at the University of
Chicago's index:
.
(you know, a detailed scholarly index) under "division of labor": you won't
find an entry for that passage-it's simply not there.36
".
Well, that's real scholarship: suppress the facts totally, present them as
the opposite of what they are, and figure, "probably nobody's going to read
to page 473 anyhow, because I didn't." I mean, ask the guys who edited it if
""

222

Understanding Power

they ever read to page 473-answer: well, they probably read the first
paragraph, then sort of remembered what they'd been taught in some college course.
But the point is, for classical liberals in the eighteenth century, there was
a certain conception of just what human beings are like-namely, that what
kind of creatures they are depends on the kind of work they do, and the
kind of control they have over it, and their ability to act creatively and according to their own decisions and choices. And there was in fact a lot of
very insightful comment about this at the time.
So for example, one of the founders of classical liberalism, Wilhelm von
Humboldt (who incidentally is very admired by so-called "conservatives"
today, because they don't read him), pointed out that if a worker produces a
beautiful object on command, you may "admire what the worker does, but
you will despise what he is "-because that's not really behaving like a
human being, it's just behaving like a machine.37 And that conception runs
right through classical liberalism. In fact, even half a century later, Alexis
de Tocqueville [French politician and writer] pointed out that you can have
systems in which "the art advances and the artisan recedes," but that's inhuman-because what you're really interested in is the artisan, you're interested in people, and for people to have the opportunity to live full and
rewarding lives they have to be in control of what they do, even if that happens to be economically less efficient.38
Well, okay-obviously there's just been a dramatic change in intellectual
and cultural attitudes over the past couple centuries. But I think those classical liberal conceptions now have to be recovered, and the ideas at the
heart of them should take root on a mass scale.
Now, the sources of power and authority that people could see in front
of their eyes in the eighteenth century were quite different from the ones
that we have today-back then it was the feudal system, and the Church, and
the absolutist state that they were focused on; they couldn't see the industrial corporation, because it didn't exist yet. But if you take the basic
classical liberal principles and apply them to the modern period, I think you
actually come pretty close to the principles that animated revolutionary
Barcelona in the late 1930s-to what's called "anarcho-syndicalism." [Anarcho-syndicalism is a form of libertarian socialism that was practiced
briefly in regions of Spain during its revolution and civil war of 1936, until
it was destroyed by the simultaneous efforts of the Soviet Union, the Western powers, and the Fascists.] I think that's about as high a level as humans
have yet achieved in trying to realize these libertarian principles, which in
my view are the right ones. I mean, I'm not saying that everything that was
done in that revolution was right, but in its general spirit and character, in
the idea of developing the kind of society that Orwell saw and described in
I think his greatest work, Homage to Catalonia--with popular control over
all the institutions of society-okay, that's the right direction in which to
move, I think.39
...•

Chapter Six

223

The Computer and the Crowbar
MAN: Noam, given what you were saying before about our limited understanding of human nature and social change, don't you think there's a caution there in general for people intervening in social patterns involving
human beings?
Yes-any kind of drastic intervention in a human being, or a human society, is very dubious. Like, suppose you've got a personal computer and it
isn't working-it's a bad idea to hit it with a crowbar. Maybe hitting it with a
crowbar will by accident fix it, but it's by and large not a good tactic-and
human societies are much more complex than computers, as are human beings. So you really never understand what you're doing. People have to
carry out changes for themselves: they can't be imposed upon them from
above.
Take the Spanish Revolution again. I mean, that was just one year in a
rather undeveloped country (though it had industry and so on), so it's not
like a model for the future. But a lot of interesting things happened in the
course of it, and they didn't just happen out of the blue-they happened out of
maybe fifty years of serious organizing and experimentation, and attempts
to try it, and failures, and being smashed up by the army, and then trying
again. So when people say it was spontaneous, that's just not true: it came
from a lot of experience, and thinking, and working, and so on, and then
when the revolutionary moment came and the existing system sort of
collapsed, people had in their heads a picture of what to do, and had even
tried it, and they then tried to implement it on a mass scale. And it was implemented in many different ways-there wasn't any single pattern that was
followed, the various collectives were experimenting on their own under
different conditions, and finding out for themselves what worked.40 And
that's a good example of how I think constructive change has to happen.
On the other hand, if an economist from, say, Harvard, goes to some
Eastern European country today and tells them, "Here's the way to develop,"
that's worse than hitting a computer with a crowbar: there are a million
different social and cultural and economic factors they don't understand, and
any big change that's pressed on people is very likely to be disastrous, no
matter what it is-and of course, it always is disastrous. Incidentally, it's
disastrous for the victims-it's usually very good for the people who are
carrying out the experiments, which is why these experiments have been
carried out for the last couple hundred years, since the British started them
in India. I mean, everyone of them is a disaster for the victims and they're
invariably good for the guys carrying out the experiments.41 Well, as far as
people who are interested in social reform are concerned, what that suggests
is, people better do it themselves, and a step at a time, under their own
control. That's in fact what was being attempted on a fairly local scale in
Barcelona, and I think it's the kind of thing we have to work towards now.

7

Intellectuals and Social Change
Based primarily on discussions at Woods Hole and Rowe,
Massachusetts, in 1989, 1993 and 1994.

The Leninist/Capitalist Intelligentsia
MAN: Your vision of a libertarian socialism is a very appealing one-I'm
wondering, what's gone wrong?
First of all, maybe nothing's gone wrong. You could argue that we
haven't been ready for it yet-but there was also a period when we weren't
ready for ending slavery either; when conditions, including subjective conditions, were such that abolition just wasn't in the cards. So one could argue
that conditions today are such that we need the degree of hierarchy and
domination that exists in totalitarian institutions like capitalist enterprises,
just in order to satisfy our needs-or else a "dictatorship of the proletariat," or
some other authoritarian structure like that. I mean, I don't believe a word of
it-but the point is, the justification for any kind of power system has to be
argued and proven to people before it has any claim to legitimacy. And
those arguments haven't been made out in this case.
If you look at what's actually happened to the various efforts at libertarian socialism that have taken place around the world, the concentration of
force and violence present in those situations has just been such that certain
outcomes were virtually guaranteed, and consequently all incipient efforts at
cooperative workers' control, say, have simply been crushed. There have in
fact been efforts in this direction for hundreds of years-the problem is, they
regularly get destroyed. And often they're destroyed by force.
The Bolsheviks [political party that seized power during the Russian
Revolution and later became the Communist Party] are a perfect example. In
the stages leading up to the Bolshevik coup in October 1917, there were
incipient socialist institutions developing in Russia-workers' councils,
collectives, things like that [i.e. after a popular revolution first toppled the
224

Chapter Seven

225

Tsar in February 1917]. And they survived to an extent once the Bolsheviks
took over-but not for very long; Lenin and Trotsky pretty much eliminated
them as they consolidated their power. I mean, you can argue about the
justification for eliminating them, but the fact is that the socialist initiatives
were pretty quickly eliminated.
Now, people who want to justify it say, "The Bolsheviks had to do it"that's the standard justification: Lenin and Trotsky had to do it, because of
the contingencies of the civil war, for survival, there wouldn't have been
food otherwise, this and that. Well, obviously the question there is, was that
true? To answer that, you've got to look at the historical facts: I don't think
it was true. In fact, I think the incipient socialist structures in Russia were
dismantled before the really dire conditions arose. Alright, here you get into
a question where you don't want to be too cavalier about it-it's a question of
historical fact, and of what the people were like, what they were thinking
and so on, and you've got to find out what the answer is, you can't just
guess. But from reading their own writings, my feeling is that Lenin and
Trotsky knew what they were doing, it was conscious and understandable,
and they even had a theory behind it, both a moral theory and a socioeconomic theory. 1
First of all, as orthodox Marxists, they didn't really believe that a socialist revolution was possible in Russia, because Russia was just a peasant
backwater: it wasn't the kind of advanced industrial society where in their
view the coming socialist revolution was supposed to happen. So when the
Bolsheviks got power, they were hoping to carry out kind of a holding action and wait for "the iron laws of history" to grind out the revolution in
Germany, where it was supposed to happen by historical necessity, and then
Russia would continue to be a backwater, but it would then develop with
German help.2
Well, it didn't end up happening in Germany: there was a revolution, in
January 1919, but it was wiped out, and the German working class was
suppressed. So at that point, Lenin and Trotsky were stuck holding the bagand they basically ended up trying to run a peasant society by violence:
since Russia was such a deeply impoverished Third World society, they
thought it was necessary just to beat the people into development. So they
took steps to turn the workers into what they called a "labor army," under
control of a "maximal leader," who was going to force the country to
industrialize under what they themselves referred to as "state-capitalism." 3
Their hope was that this would carry Russia over the early stages of capitalism and industrialization, until it reached a point of material development
where then the iron laws of history would start to work as the Master said
they were going to, and socialism would finally be achieved [i.e. Karl Marx
theorized that history progresses according to natural "laws," and that the
advanced stages of capitalism will inevitably lead to socialism].
So there was a theory behind their actions, and in fact a moral principlenamely, it will be better for people in the long run if we do this. But

226

Understanding Power

what they did, I think, was to set the framework for a totalitarian system,
which of course Stalin then accelerated.
MAN: Would you describe the authoritarian result of the Bolsheviks' actions as an honest mistake, a "historical accident" maybe-or was it just the
natural outgrowth of the Leninist worldview: the idea that only a few
people are smart and knowledgeable enough to be the leaders, and they
should run the show?
Yeah, in my opinion the heart of the problem is Marxism-Leninism itself-the very idea that a "vanguard party" can, or has any right to, or has any
capacity to lead the stupid masses towards some future they're too dumb to
understand for themselves. I think what it's going to lead them towards is "I
rule you with a whip." Institutions of domination have a nice way of
reproducing themselves-I think that's kind of like an obvious sociological
truism.
And actually, if you look back, that was in fact Bakunin's prediction half
a century before-he said this was exactly what was going to happen.
[Bakunin was a nineteenth-century Russian anarchist, and with Marx a
leading figure in the main socialist labor organization of the time, the First
International.] I mean, Bakunin was talking about the people around Marx,
this was before Lenin was born, but his prediction was that the nature of the
intelligentsia as a formation in modern industrial society is that they are
going to try to become the social managers. Now, they're not going to
become the social managers because they own capital, and they're not going
to become the social managers because they've got a lot of guns. They are
going to become the social managers because they can control, organize,
and direct what's called "knowledge"-they have the skills to process
information, and to mobilize support for decision-making, and so on and so
forth. And Bakunin predicted that these people would fall into two categories. On the one hand, there would be the "left" intellectuals, who would
try to rise to power on the backs of mass popular movements, and if they
could gain power, they would then beat the people into submission and try
to control them. On the other hand, if they found that they couldn't get
power that way themselves, they would become the servants of what we
would nowadays call "state-capitalism," though Bakunin didn't use the term.
And either of these two categories of intellectuals, he said, would be
"beating the people with the people's stick"-that is, they'd be presenting
themselves as representatives of the people, so they'd be holding the people's stick, but they would be beating the people with it.4
Well, Bakunin didn't go on with this, but I think it follows from his
analysis that it's extremely easy to shift from one position to the other-it's
extremely easy to undergo what's called the "God That Failed" syndrome.
You start off as basically a Leninist, someone who's going to become part
of what Bakunin called the "Red Bureaucracy," you see that power doesn't
lie that way, and then you very easily become an ideologist of the right, and
de-

Chapter Seven

227

vote your life to exposing the sins of your former comrades, who haven't
yet seen the light and shifted to where power really lies. And you barely
have to change at all, really, you're just operating under a different formal
power structure. In fact, we're seeing it right now in the former Soviet
Union: the same guys who were Communist thugs, Stalinist thugs two years
back are now running banks, they're enthusiastic free-marketeers, praising
America and so on. And this has been going on for forty years-it's become
kind of a joke.
Now, Bakunin didn't say it's the nature of people that this will happen. I
mean, I don't know how much he thought it through, but what we should
say is that a Red Bureaucracy or its state-capitalist commissar-class equivalent is not going to take over because that's the nature of people-it's that the
ones who don't do it will be cast by the wayside, the ones who do do it will
make out. The ones who are ruthless and brutal and harsh enough to seize
power are the ones who are going to survive. The ones who try to associate
themselves with popular organizations and help the general population
itself become organized, who try to assist popular movements in that kind
of way, they're just not going to survive under these situations of concentrated power.
Marxist "Theory" and Intellectual Fakery
WOMAN: Noam, apart from the idea of the "vanguard," I'm interested
why you're so critical of the whole broader category of Marxist analysis in
general-like people in the universities and so on who refer to themselves as
"Marxists." I've noticed you're never very happy with it.
Well, I guess one thing that's unattractive to me about "Marxism" is the
very idea that there is such a thing. It's a rather striking fact that you don't
find things like "Marxism" in the sciences-like, there isn't any part of
physics which is "Einsteinianism," let's say, or "Planckianism" or something like that. It doesn't make any sense-because people aren't gods: they
just discover things, and they make mistakes, and their graduate students
tell them why they're wrong, and then they go on and do things better the
next time. But there are no gods around. I mean, scientists do use the terms
"Newtonianism" and "Darwinism," but nobody thinks of those as doctrines
that you've got to somehow be loyal to, and figure out what the Master
thought, and what he would have said in this new circumstance and so on.
That sort of thing is just completely alien to rational existence, it only
shows up in irrational domains.
So Marxism, Freudianism: anyone of these things I think is an irrational
cult. They're theology, so they're whatever you think of theology; I don't
think much of it. In fact, in my view that's exactly the right analogy: notions
like Marxism and Freudianism belong to the history of organized religion.
So part of my problem is just its existence: it seems to me that even to
dis-

228

Understanding Power

cuss something like "Marxism" is already making a mistake. Like, we don't
discuss "Planckism." Why not? Because it would be crazy. Planck [German
physicist] had some things to say, and some of them are right, and those
were absorbed into later science, and some of them are wrong, and they
were improved on. It's not that Planck wasn't a great man-all kinds of great
discoveries, very smart, mistakes, this and that. That's really the way we
ought to look at it, I think. As soon as you set up the idea of "Marxism" or
"Freudianism" or something, you've already abandoned rationality.
It seems to me the question a rational person ought to ask is, what is
there in Marx's work that's worth saving and modifying, and what is there
that ought to be abandoned? Okay, then you look and you find things. I
think Marx did some very interesting descriptive work on nineteenthcentury
history. He was a very good journalist. When he describes the British in
India, or the Paris Commune [70-day French workers' revolution in 1871],
or the parts of Capital that talk about industrial London, a lot of that is kind
of interesting-I think later scholarship has improved it and changed it, but
it's quite interesting.5
He had an abstract model of capitalism which-I'm not sure how valuable
it is, to tell you the truth. It was an abstract model, and like any abstract
model, it's not really intended to be descriptively accurate in detail, it's
intended to sort of pull out some crucial features and study those. And you
have to ask in the case of an abstract model, how much of the complex
reality does it really capture? That's questionable in this case-first of all, it's
questionable how much of nineteenth-century capitalism it captured, and I
think it's even more questionable how much of late-twentieth-century
capitalism it captures.
There are supposed to be laws [i.e. of history and economics]. I can't understand them, that's all I can say; it doesn't seem to me that there are any
laws that follow from it. Not that I know of any better laws, I just don't
think we know about "laws" in history.
There's nothing about socialism in Marx, he wasn't a socialist philosopher-there are about five sentences in Marx's whole work that refer to socialism.6 He was a theorist of capitalism. I think he introduced some
interesting concepts at least, which every sensible person ought to have
mastered and employ, notions like class, and relations of production ...
WOMAN: Dialectics?
Dialectics is one that I've never understood, actually-I've just never understood what the word means. Marx doesn't use it, incidentally, it's used
by Engels? And if anybody can tell me what it is, I'll be happy. I mean, I've
read all kinds of things which talk about "dialectics"-I haven't the foggiest
idea what it is. It seems to mean something about complexity, or alternative
positions, or change, or something. I don't know.
I'll tell you the honest truth: I'm kind of simple-minded when it comes to

Chapter Seven

229

these things. Whenever I hear a four-syllable word I get skeptical, because I
want to make sure you can't say it in monosyllables. Don't forget, part of
the whole intellectual vocation is creating a niche for yourself, and if everybody can understand what you're talking about, you've sort of lost, because
then what makes you special? What makes you special has got to be
something that you had to work really hard to understand, and you mastered
it, and all those guys out there don't understand it, and then that becomes
the basis for your privilege and your power.
So take what's called "literary theory" -I mean, I don't think there's any
such thing as literary "theory," any more than there's cultural "theory" or
historical "theory." If you're just reading books and talking about them and
getting people to understand them, okay, you can be terrific at that, like
Edmund Wilson was terrific at it-but he didn't have a literary theory. On the
other hand, if you want to mingle in the same room with that physicist over
there who's talking about quarks, you'd better have a complicated theory too
that nobody can understand: he has a complicated theory that nobody can
understand, why shouldn't I have a complicated theory that nobody can
understand? If someone came along with a theory of history, it would be the
same: either it would be truisms, or maybe some smart ideas, like
somebody could say, "Why not look at economic factors lying behind the
Constitution?" or something like that-but there'd be nothing there that
couldn't be said in monosyllables.
In fact, it's extremely rare, outside of the natural sciences, to find things
that can't be said in monosyllables: there are just interesting, simple ideas,
which are often extremely difficult to come up with and hard to work out.
Like, if you want to try to understand how the modern industrial economy
developed, let's say, that can take a lot of work. But the "theory" will be extremely thin, if by "theory" we mean something with principles which are
not obvious when you first look at them, and from which you can deduce
surprising consequences and try to confirm the principles-you're not going
to find anything like that in the social world.
Incidentally, I should say that my own political writing is often denounced from both the left and the right for being non-theoretical-and that's
completely correct. But it's exactly as theoretical as anyone else's, I just
don't call it "theoretical," I call it "trivial" -which is in fact what it is. I
mean, it's not that some of these people whose stuff is considered "deep
theory" and so on don't have some interesting things to say. Often they have
very interesting things to say. But it's nothing that you couldn't say at the
level of a high school student, or that a high school student couldn't figure
out if they had the time and support and a little bit of training.
I think people should be extremely skeptical when intellectual life constructs structures which aren't transparent-because the fact of the matter is
that in most areas of life, we just don't understand anything very much.
There are some areas, like say, quantum physics, where they're not faking.
But most of the time it's just fakery, I think: anything that's at all under-

230

Understanding Power

stood can probably be described pretty simply. And when words like "dialectics" come along, or "hermeneutics," and all this kind of stuff that's
supposed to be very profound, like Goering, "I reach for my revolver."
MAN: I find it very reinforcing that you don't understand the word "dialectics, " it sort of validates me.
I'm not saying that it doesn't have any meaning-you observe people using
the term and they look like they're communicating. But it's like when 1
watch people talking Turkish: something's going on, but I'm not part of it.
Actually, occasionally in interviews I've said this about not understanding "dialectics," and 1 get long letters back from people saying, "You don't
understand, here's what 'dialectical' is"-and either it's incomprehensible, or
else it's trivial. So maybe I've got a gene missing or something-like people
can be tone-deaf, they just can't hear the music. But everything 1 encounter
in these fields either seems to be sort of interesting, but pretty obvious once
you see it-maybe you didn't see it at first, and somebody had to point it out
to you-or else just incomprehensible.
I'm skeptical: 1 think one has a right to be skeptical when you don't understand something. 1 mean, when 1 look at a page of, say, quantum electrodynamics, 1 don't understand a word of it. But 1 know what 1 would
have to do to get to understand it, and I'm pretty confident that 1 could get
to understand it-I've understood other complicated things. So 1 figure if 1
bothered to put myself through the discipline, and 1 studied the early stuff
and the later stuff, I'd finally get to the point where 1 understood it. Or 1
could go to someone in the Physics Department and say, "Tell me why
everybody's excited about this stuff," and they could adapt it to my level
and tell me how to pursue it further. Maybe 1 wouldn't understand it very
deeply, or 1 couldn't have invented it or something, but I'd at least begin to
understand it. On the other hand, when 1 look at a page of Marxist
philosophy or literary theory, 1 have the feeling that 1 could stare at it for
the rest of my life and I'd never understand it-and 1 don't know how to
proceed to get to understand it any better, 1 don't even know what steps 1
could take.
1 mean, it's possible that these fields are beyond me, maybe I'm not smart
enough or something. But that would have kind of a funny conclusion-it's
nothing to do with me. That would mean that somehow in these domains
people have been able to create something that's more complex than physics
and mathematics-because those are subjects 1 think 1 could get to
understand. And 1 just don't believe that, frankly: 1 don't believe that literary theorists or Marxian philosophers have advanced to some new intellectuallevel that transcends century after century of hard intellectual work.
MAN: Do you think the same thing about philosophy in general?
There are parts of philosophy which 1 think 1 understand, and it's most
of classical philosophy. And there are things that 1 don't understand,
because

Chapter Seven

231

they don't make any sense-and that's okay too, these are hard questions. I
mean, it's not necessarily a criticism to say that something doesn't make
sense: there are subjects that it's hard to talk sensibly about. But ifI read,
say, Russell, or analytic philosophy, or Wittgenstein and so on, I think I can
come to understand what they're saying, and I can see why I think it's
wrong, as I often do. But when I read, you know, Derrida, or Lacan, or AIthusser, or any of these-I just don't understand it. It's like words passing in
front of my eyes: I can't follow the arguments, I don't see the arguments,
anything that looks like a description of a fact looks wrong to me. So
maybe I'm missing a gene or something, it's possible. But my honest
opinion is, I think it's all fraud.
MAN: I think you may be glorifying the scientists a bit by projecting them
as somehow kind of pure. For example, take Newtonian mechanics: Einstein came along and showed how it was wrong, but over the years the scientific community did refer to it as "Newtonian" mechanics.
That's an interesting case, because Newtonian mechanics was treated as
kind of holy-because it was such a revolutionary development. I mean, it
was really the first time in human history that people ever had an explanation of things in any deep sense: it was so comprehensive, and so simple,
and so far-reaching in its consequences that it almost looked like it was
necessary. And in fact, it was treated that way for a long time-so much so
that Kant, for example, regarded it as the task of philosophy to derive
Newtonian physics from a priori principles, and to show that it was certain
truth, on a par with mathematics. And it really wasn't until the latenineteenth and early-twentieth century that the fallacy of those conceptions
became quite clear, and with that realization there was a real advance in our
conception of what "science" is. So science did have kind of a religious
character for a period, you're right-and that was something we had to get
ourselves out of, I think. It doesn't happen anymore.
Ideological Control in the Sciences and Humanities
MAN: Would you say that as academic disciplines, the sciences are fundamentally different from the humanities and social sciences in terms of ideological control? There don't seem to be the same kinds of barriers to
inquiry or the same commitment to indoctrination in the scientific fields as
there are in other areas, like in economics or political science, for
instance.
Well, I think there was an ideological control problem in the sciences,
it's just that we transcended it-Galileo faced it, for example [the Italian astronomer and scientist was arrested by the Roman Catholic Church in 1633
and compelled to renounce his conclusion that the earth revolves around the
sun]. You go back a couple centuries in the West and the ideo-

232

Understanding Power

logical control problem in the sciences was severe: Descartes is alleged to
have destroyed the final volume of his treatise on the world, the one that
was supposed to deal with the human mind, because he learned of the fate
of Galileo. That's the analog to death squads-the Inquisition was doing
precisely that. Okay, that's passed in the West at least, but not everywhere.
MAN: But why has it passed?
Well, I think there are a few reasons. One is just a general increase in
freedom and enlightenment, won through popular struggles over centurieswe've become a much freer society than we were in absolutist times. And
intellectuals have often played a role in that, breaking down ideological barriers and creating kind of a space for greater freedom of thought, for instance during the Enlightenment [in the eighteenth century]. That often took
a lot of courage and quite a struggle, and it goes on until today.
There are also utilitarian reasons. It turns out that, especially since the
mid-nineteenth century, the ability to gain a deeper understanding of the
physical world through modern science has interacted critically with modern industrial development: progress in the sciences has contributed materially to private profit-making, private power. So there are utilitarian reasons
for allowing freedom of scientific inquiry, but I wouldn't over-exaggerate
them-I think what's happened with the sciences is a lot like the process
that's led to freedom in other domains, like why we don't have slavery, let's
say, or why after 150 years of American history women won the right to
vote [in 1920].
And also, remember, after the great scientific revolutions that led to the
Enlightenment, it got to the point where you couldn't do science anymore if
you were subjected to the kinds of doctrinal controls that remain quite effective in other fields. I mean, if you're a physicist after Newton trying to
spin off ideological fanaticism, you're just out of the game-progress has
been too much. That's very different from the social sciences and the humanities-you can tell falsehoods forever in those fields and nothing will
ever stop you, like you don't have Mother Nature around keeping you honest. And the result is, there's a real difference in the two cultures.
So when you go to graduate school in the natural sciences, you're immediately brought into critical inquiry-and in fact, what you're learning is kind
of a craft; you don't really teach science, people sort of get the idea how to
do it as apprentices, hopefully by working with good people. But the goal is
to learn how to do creative work, and to challenge everything. That's very
different from the humanities and the social sciences, where what you're
supposed to do is absorb a body of knowledge, and then pick yourself a
little area in it and for the rest of your life work on that. I mean, the way
you become a highly respected scholar in the humanities, say, is to pick
some arcane area, like English novels from 1720 to 1790, and get to know
more of the data about that than any other human being in history.

Chapter Seven

233

So you know who copied this word from that, and so on. A lot of it is kind
of mindless, but that's the sort of thing you're supposed to know. And
there's really very little intellectual challenge: the only way you could be
wrong is if you got a comma out of place-and in fact, that's considered the
worst crime. I'm kind of caricaturing it a bit-but frankly I think it works this
way. And certainly the sciences are very different.
The Function of the Schools
WOMAN: But I guess I don't quite see how this ideological control
mechanism actually works in the humanities and social sciences-I mean,
how exactly is it that the schools end up being an indoctrination system?
Can you describe the process in more detail?
Well, the main point I think is that the entire school curriculum, from
kindergarten through graduate school, will be tolerated only so long as it
continues to perform its institutional role. So take the universities, which in
many respects are not very different from the media in the way they function-though they're a much more complex system, so they're harder to study
systematically. Universities do not generate nearly enough funds to support
themselves from tuition money alone: they're parasitic institutions that need
to be supported from the outside, and that means they're dependent on
wealthy alumni, on corporations, and on the government, which are groups
with the same basic interests. Well, as long as the universities serve those
interests, they'll be funded. If they ever stop serving those interests, they'll
start to get in trouble.
So for example, in the late 1960s it began to appear that the universities
were not adequately performing that service-students were asking questions, they were thinking independently, they were rejecting a lot of the
Establishment value-system, challenging all sorts of things-and the corporations began to react to that, they began to react in a number of ways. For
one thing, they began to develop alternative programs, like LB.M. began to
set up kind of a vocational training program to produce engineers on their
own: if M.LT. wasn't going to do it for them the way they wanted, they'd do
it themselves-and that would have meant they'd stop funding M.LT. Well,
of course things never really got out of hand in the Sixties, so the moves in
that direction were very limited. But those are the kinds of pressures there
are.8
And in fact, you can even see similar things right now. Take all this business about Allan Bloom and that book everybody's been talking about, The
Closing of the American Mind.9 It's this huge best-seller, I don't know if
you've bothered looking at it-it's mind-bogglingly stupid. I read it once in
the supermarket while my ... I hate to say it, while my wife was shopping I
stood there and read the damn thing; it takes about fifteen minutes to read.

234

Understanding Power

MAN: You read two thousand words a minute?
I mean, "read"-you know, sort of turn the pages to see if there's anything
there that isn't totally stupid. But what that book is basically saying is that
education ought to be set up like some sort of variant of the Marine Corps,
in which you just march the students through a canon of "great thoughts"
that are picked out for everybody. So some group of people will say, "Here
are the great thoughts, the great thoughts of Western civilization are in this
corpus; you guys sit there and learn them, read them and learn them, and be
able to repeat them." That's the kind of model Bloom is calling for.
Well, anybody who's ever thought about education or been involved in
it, or even gone to school, knows that the effect of that is that students will
end up knowing and understanding virtually nothing. It doesn't matter how
great the thoughts are, if they are simply imposed upon you from the
outside and you're forced through them step by step, after you're done you'll
have forgotten what they are. I mean, I'm sure that everyone of you has
taken any number of courses in school in which you worked, and you did
your homework, you passed the exam, maybe you even got an "A"and a
week later you couldn't even remember what the course was about. You
only learn things and learn how to think if there's some purpose for
learning, some motivation that's coming out of you somehow. In fact, all of
the methodology in education isn't really much more than that-getting
students to want to learn. Once they want to learn, they'll do it.
But the point is that this model Bloom and all these other people are calling for is just a part of the whole method of imposing discipline through the
schools, and of preventing people from learning how to think for themselves. So what you do is make students go through and sort of memorize a
canon of what are called "Good Books," which you force on them, and then
somehow great things are supposed to happen. It's a completely stupid form
of education, but I think that's part of why it's selected and supported, and
why there's so much hysteria that it's been questioned in past yearsjust
because it's very functional to train people and discipline them in ways like
this. The popularity of the Bloom thing, I would imagine, is mostly a reaction to the sort of liberating effect that the student movement of the Sixties and other challenges to the schools and universities began to have.
WOMAN: All of Allan Bloom's "great thoughts" are by elite white males.
Yeah, okay-but it wouldn't even matter if he had some different array of
material, it really wouldn't matter. The idea that there's some array of "the
deep thoughts," and we smart people will pick them out and you dumb guys
will learn them-or memorize them at least, because you don't really learn
them if they're just forced on you-that's nonsense. If you're serious about,
say, reading Plato,lO it's fine to read Plato-but you try to fig-

Chapter Seven

235

ure out what's right, what's wrong, what's a better way of looking at it, why
was he saying this when he should have been saying something else, what
grotesque error of reasoning did he make over here, and so on and so forth.
That's the way you would read serious work, just like you would in the sciences. But you're not supposed to read it that way here, you're supposed to
read it because it's the truth, or it's the great thoughts or something. And
that's kind of like the worst form of theology.
The point is, it doesn't matter what you read, what matters is how you
read it. Now, I don't mean comic books, but there's a lot of cultural wealth
out there from all over the place, and to learn what it means for something
to be culturally rich, you can explore almost anywhere: there's no fixed
subset that is the basis of truth and understanding. I mean, you can read the
"Good Books," and memorize what they said, and forget them a week laterif it doesn't mean anything to you personally, you'd might as well not have
read them. And it's very hard to know what's going to mean something to
different people. But there's plenty of exciting literature around in the
world, and there's absolutely no reason to believe that unless you've read
the Greeks and Dante and so on, you've missed things-I mean, yeah, you've
missed things, but you've also missed things if you haven't learned
something about other cultural traditions too.
Just take a look at philosophy, for example, which is a field that I know
something about: some of the best, most exciting, most active philosophers
in the contemporary world, people who've made a real impact on the field,
couldn't tell Plato from Aristotle, except for what they remember from
some Freshman course they once took. Now, that's not to say you shouldn't
read Plato and Aristotle-sure, there are millions of things you should read;
nobody's ever going to read more than a tiny fraction of the things you
wished you knew. But just reading them does you no good: you only learn
if the material is integrated into your own creative processes somehow, otherwise it just passes through your mind and disappears. And there's nothing
valuable about that-it has basically the effect of learning the catechism, or
memorizing the Constitution or something like that.
Real education is about getting people involved in thinking for themselves-and that's a tricky business to know how to do well, but clearly it
requires that whatever it is you're looking at has to somehow catch people's
interest and make them want to think, and make them want to pursue and
explore. And just regurgitating "Good Books" is absolutely the worst way
to do it-that's just a way of turning people into automata. You may call that
an education if you want, but it's really the opposite of an education, which
is why people like William Bennett [Reagan's Secretary of Education] and
Allan Bloom and these others are all so much in favor of it.
WOMAN: Are you saying that the real purpose of the universities and th~
schools is just to indoctrinate people-and really not much else?
\*
)

236

Understanding Power

Well, I'm not quite saying that. Like, I wouldn't say that no meaningful
work takes place in the schools, or that they only exist to provide manpower for the corporate system or something like that-these are very complex systems, after all. But the basic institutional role and function of the
schools, and why they're supported, is to provide an ideological service:
there's a real selection for obedience and conformity. And I think that
process starts in kindergarten, actually.
Let me just tell you a personal story. My oldest, closest friend is a guy
who came to the United States from Latvia when he was fifteen, fleeing
from Hitler. He escaped to New York with his parents and went to George
Washington High School, which in those days at least was the school for
bright Jewish kids in New York City. And he once told me that the first
thing that struck him about American schools was the fact that if he got a
"C" in a course, nobody cared, but if he came to school three minutes late
he was sent to the principal's office-and that generalized. He realized that
what it meant is, what's valued here is the ability to work on an assembly
line, even if it's an intellectual assembly line. The important thing is to be
able to obey orders, and to do what you're told, and to be where you're
supposed to be. The values are, you're going to be a factory worker somewhere-maybe they'll call it a university-but you're going to be following
somebody else's orders, and just doing your work in some prescribed way.
And what matters is discipline, not figuring things out for yourself, or understanding things that interest you-those are kind of marginal: just make
sure you meet the requirements of a factory.
Well, that's pretty much what the schools are like, I think: they reward discipline
and obedience, and they punish independence of mind. If you happen to be a
little innovative, or maybe you forgot to come to school one
day because
you were reading a book or something, that's a tragedy, that's a crime-because
you're not supposed to think, you're supposed to obey,
and just proceed
through the material in whatever way they require. And in fact, most of the
people who make it through the education sys- tern and get into the elite
universities are able to do it because they've been willing to obey a lot of stupid
orders for years and years-that's the way I did it, for example. Like, you're told
by some stupid teacher, "Do this," which you know makes no sense whatsoever,
but you do it, and if you do it you get to the next rung, and then you obey the
next order, and finally you work your way through and they give you your
letters: an awful lot of education is like that, from the very beginning. Some
people go along with it because they figure, "Okay, I'll do any stupid thing that
asshole says because I want to get ahead"; others do it because they've just
internalized the values-but after a while, those two things tend to get sort of
blurred. But Sou do it, or else you're out: you ask too many questions and you're
going to get in trouble.
Now, there are also people who don't go along-and they're called "behavior problems," or "unmotivated," or things like that. Well, you don't

Chapter Seven

237

want to be too glib about it-there are children with behavior problemsbut a
lot of them are just independent-minded, or don't like to conform, or just
want to go their own way. And they get into trouble right from the very
beginning, and are typically weeded out. I mean, I've taught young kids too,
and the fact is there are always some who just don't take your word for it.
And the very unfortunate tendency is to try to beat them down, because
they're a pain in the neck. But what they ought to be is encouraged. Yeah:
why take my word for it? Who the heck am I? Figure it out for yourself.
That's what real education would be about, in fact.
Actually, I happen to have been very lucky myself and gone to an experimental-progressive Deweyite school, from about the time I was age oneand-a-half to twelve Uohn Dewey was an American philosopher and
educational reformer]. And there it was done routinely: children were encouraged to challenge everything, and you sort of worked on your own, you
were supposed to think things through for yourself-it was a real experience.
And it was quite a striking change when it ended and I had to go to the city
high school, which was the pride of the city school system. It was the
school for academically-oriented kids in Philadelphia-and it was the
dumbest, most ridiculous place I've ever been, it was like falling into a
black hole or something. For one thing, it was extremely competitivebecause that's one of the best ways of controlling people. So everybody was
ranked, and you always knew exactly where you were: are you third in the
class, or maybe did you move down to fourth? All of this stuff is put into
people's heads in various ways in the schools-that you've got to beat down
the person next to you, and just look out for yourself. And there are all sorts
of other things like that too.
But the point is, there's nothing necessary about them in education. I
know, because I went through an alternative to it-so it can certainly be
done. But given the external power structure of the society in which they
function now, the institutional role of the schools for the most part is just to
train people for obedience and conformity, and to make them controllable
and indoctrinated-and as long as the schools fulfill that role, they'll be
supported.
Now, of course, it doesn't work a hundred percent-so you do get some
people all the way through who don't go along. And as I was saying, in the
sciences at least, people have to be trained for creativity and disobediencebecause there is no other way you can do science. But in the humanities and
social sciences, and in fields like journalism and economics and so on,
that's much less true-there people have to be trained to be managers, and
controllers, and to accept things, and not to question too much. So you
really do get a very different kind of education. And people who break out
of line are weeded out or beaten back in all kinds of ways.
I mean, it's not very abstract: if you're, say, a young person in college, or
in journalism, or for that matter a fourth grader, and you have too much of
an independent mind, there's a whole variety of devices that will be used to

238

Understanding Power

deflect you from that error-and if you can't be controlled, to marginalize or
just eliminate you. In fourth grade, you're a "behavior problem." In college,
you may be "irresponsible," or "erratic," or "not the right kind of student."
If you make it to the faculty, you'll fail in what's sometimes called
"collegiality," getting along with your colleagues. If you're a young journalist and you're pursuing stories that the people at the managerial level
above you understand, either intuitively or explicitly, are not to be pursued,
you can be sent off to work at the Police desk, and advised that you don't
have "proper standards of objectivity." There's a whole range of these techmques.
Now, we live in a free society, so you don't get sent to gas chambers and
they don't send the death squads after you-as is commonly done, and not far
from here, say in Mexico.II But there are nevertheless quite successful
devices, both subtle and extreme, to ensure that doctrinal correctness is not
seriously infringed upon.
Subtler Methods of Control
Let me just start with some of the more subtle ways; I'll give you an example. After I finished college, I went to this program at Harvard called the
"Society of Fellows"-which is kind of this elite finishing school, where they
teach you to be a Harvard or Yale professor, and to drink the right wine,
and say the right things, and so on and so forth. I mean, you had all of the
resources of Harvard available to you and your only responsibility was to
show up at a dinner once a week, so it was great for just doing your work if
you wanted to. But the real point of the whole thing was socialization:
teaching the right values.
For instance, I remember there was a lot of anglophilia at Harvard at the
time-you were supposed to wear British clothes, and pretend you spoke
with a British accent, that sort of stuff. In fact, there were actually guys
there who I thought were British, who had never been outside of the United
States. If any of you have studied literature or history or something, you
might recognize some of this, those are the places you usually find it. Well,
somehow I managed to survive that, I don't know how exactly-but most
didn't. And what I discovered is that a large part of education at the really
elite institutions is simply refinement, teaching the social graces: what kind
of clothes you should wear, how to drink port the right way, how to have
polite conversation without talking about serious topics, but of course indicating that you could talk about serious topics if you were so vulgar as to
actually do it, all kinds of things which an intellectual is supposed to know
how to do. And that was really the main point of the program, I think.
Actually, there are much more important cases too-and they're even
more revealing about the role of the elite schools. For example, the 1930s
were a period of major labor strife and labor struggle in the U.S., and it was

Chapter Seven

239

scaring the daylights out of the whole business community here-because
labor was finally winning the right to organize, and there were other
legislative victories as well. And there were a lot of efforts to try to overcome this, but one of them was that Harvard introduced a "Trade Union
Program." What it did was to bring in rising young people in the labor
movement-you know, the guy who looks like he's going to be the Local
president next year-and have them stay in dorms in the Business School,
and put them through a whole socialization process, help them come to
share some of the values and understandings of the elite, teach them that
"Our job is to work together," "We're all in this together," and so on and so
forth. I mean, there are always two lines: for the public it's, "We're all in
this together, management and labor are cooperating, joint enterprise, harmony" and so on-meanwhile business is fighting a vicious class war on the
side. And that effort to socialize and integrate union activists-well, I've
never measured its success, but I'm sure it was very successful. And the
process was similar to what I experienced and saw a Harvard education to
be myself.
Or let me tell you another story I heard about twenty years ago from a
black civil rights activist who came up to study at Harvard Law School-it
kind of illustrates some of the other pressures that are around. This guy
gave a talk in which he described how the kids starting off at Harvard Law
School come in with long hair and backpacks and social ideals, they're all
going to go into public service law to change the world and so on-that's the
first year. Around springtime, the recruiters come for the cushy summer
jobs in the Wall Street law firms, and these students figure, "What the heck,
I can put on a tie and a jacket and shave for one day, just because I need
that money and why shouldn't I have it?" So they put on the tie and the
jacket for that one day, and they get the job, and then they go off for the
summerand when they come back in the fall, it's ties, and jackets, and
obedience, a shift of ideology. Sometimes it takes two years.
Well, obviously he was over-drawing the point-but those sorts of factors
also are very influential. I mean, I've felt it all my life: it's extremely easy to
be sucked into the dominant culture, it can be very appealing. There are a
lot of rewards. And what's more, the people you meet don't look like bad
people-you don't want to sit there and insult them. Maybe they're perfectly
nice people. So you try to be friends, maybe you even are friends. Well,
you begin to conform, you begin to adapt, you begin to smooth off the
harsher edges-and pretty soon it's just happened, it kind of seeps in. And
education at a place like Harvard is largely geared to that, to a remarkable
extent in fact.
And there are many other subtle mechanisms which contribute to ideological control as well, of course-including just the fact that the universities
support and encourage people to occupy themselves with irrelevant and
innocuous work.
Or just take the fact that certain topics are unstudiable in the schools-

Chapter Seven

239

scaring the daylights out of the whole business community here-because
labor was finally winning the right to organize, and there were other
legislative victories as well. And there were a lot of efforts to try to overcome this, but one of them was that Harvard introduced a "Trade Union
Program." What it did was to bring in rising young people in the labor
movement-you know, the guy who looks like he's going to be the Local
president next year-and have them stay in dorms in the Business School,
and put them through a whole socialization process, help them come to
share some of the values and understandings of the elite, teach them that
"Our job is to work together," "We're all in this together," and so on and so
forth. I mean, there are always two lines: for the public it's, "We're all in
this together, management and labor are cooperating, joint enterprise, harmony" and so on-meanwhile business is fighting a vicious class war on the
side. And that effort to socialize and integrate union activists-well, I've
never measured its success, but I'm sure it was very successful. And the
process was similar to what I experienced and saw a Harvard education to
be myself.
Or let me tell you another story I heard about twenty years ago from a
black civil rights activist who came up to study at Harvard Law School-it
kind of illustrates some of the other pressures that are around. This guy
gave a talk in which he described how the kids starting off at Harvard Law
School come in with long hair and backpacks and social ideals, they're all
going to go into public service law to change the world and so on-that's the
first year. Around springtime, the recruiters come for the cushy summer
jobs in the Wall Street law firms, and these students figure, "What the heck,
I can put on a tie and a jacket and shave for one day, just because I need
that money and why shouldn't I have it?" So they put on the tie and the
jacket for that one day, and they get the job, and then they go off for the
summerand when they come back in the fall, it's ties, and jackets, and
obedience, a shift of ideology. Sometimes it takes two years.
Well, obviously he was over-drawing the point-but those sorts of factors
also are very influential. I mean, I've felt it all my life: it's extremely easy to
be sucked into the dominant culture, it can be very appealing. There are a
lot of rewards. And what's more, the people you meet don't look like bad
people-you don't want to sit there and insult them. Maybe they're perfectly
nice people. So you try to be friends, maybe you even are friends. Well, you
begin to conform, you begin to adapt, you begin to smooth off the harsher
edges-and pretty soon it's just happened, it kind of seeps in. And education
at a place like Harvard is largely geared to that, to a remarkable extent in
fact.
And there are many other subtle mechanisms which contribute to ideological control as well, of course-including just the fact that the universities
support and encourage people to occupy themselves with irrelevant and
innocuous work.
Or just take the fact that certain topics are unstudiable in the schools-

Chapter Seven

241

Well, Japan has run its economy pretty much the same way we do, except with one crucial difference. Instead of using the military system, the
way they've worked their public subsidies in Japan is they have a government ministry, M.I.T.I. [the Ministry of International Trade and Industry],
which sits down with the big corporations and conglomerates and banking
firms, and plans their economic system for the next couple years-they plan
how much consumption there's going to be, and how much investment
there's going to be, and where the investment should go, and so on. Well,
that's more efficient. And since Japan is a very disciplined and obedient society culturally, the population there just does what they tell them, and nobody ever asks any questions about it.
Alright, to see how this difference played out over the years, just look at
the "Star Wars" program in the United States, for example. Star Wars [the
Strategic Defense Initiative] is the pretext for a huge amount of research
and development spending through the Pentagon system here-it's our way
of funding the new generation of computer technology, lasers, new software, and so on. Well, if you look at the distribution of expenses for Star
Wars, it turns out that it was virtually the same allocation of funding as was
made through the Japanese state-directed economic system in the same time
period: in those same years, M.I.T.I. made about the same judgments about
how to distribute their resources as we did, they spent about the same
proportion of money in lasers, and the same proportion in software, and so
onY And the reason is that all of these planners make approximately the
same judgments about the likely new technologies.
Well, why was Japan so competitive with the U.S. economically, despite
highly inauspicious conditions? There are a lot of reasons. But the main
reason is that they directed their public subsidy straight to the commercial
market. So to work on lasers, they tried to figure out ways of producing
lasers for the commercial market, and they do it pretty well. But when we
want to develop lasers for the commercial market, what we do is pour the
money into the Pentagon, which then tries to work out a way to use a laser
to shoot down a missile ten thousand miles away-and if they can work that
out, then they hope there'll be some commercial spin-offs that come out of
it all. Okay, that's less efficient. And since the Japanese are no dumber than
we are, and they have an efficient system of state-coordination while we
have an inefficient one, over the years they succeeded in the economic
competition.
Well, these are major phenomena of modern life-but where do you go to
study them in the universities or the academic profession? That's a very interesting question. You don't go to the economics department, because
that's not what they look at: the real hot-shot economics departments are interested in abstract models of how a pure free-enterprise economy worksyou know, generalizations to ten-dimensional space of some nonexistent
free-market system. You don't go to the political science department, because they're concerned with electoral statistics, and voting patterns, and

242

Understanding Power

micro-bureaucracy-like the way one government bureaucrat talks to another
in some detailed air. You don't go to the anthropology department, because
they're studying hill tribesmen in New Guinea. You don't go to the
sociology department, because they're studying crime in the ghettos. In fact,
you don't go anywhere-there isn't any field that deals with these topics.
There's no journal that deals with them. In fact, there is no academic
profession that is concerned with the central problems of modern society.
Now, you can go to the business school, and there they'll talk about thembecause those people are in the real world. But not in the academic departments: nobody there is going to tell you what's really going on in the world.
14
And it's extremely important that there not be a field that studies these
questions-because if there ever were such a field, people might come to understand too much, and in a relatively free society like ours, they might
start to do something with that understanding. Well, no institution is going
to encourage that. I mean, there's nothing in what I just said that you
couldn't explain to junior high school students, it's all pretty
straightforward. But it's not what you study in a junior high Civics coursewhat you study there is propaganda about the way systems are supposed to
work but don't.
Incidentally, part of the genius of this aspect of the higher education system is that it can get people to sell out even while they think they're doing
exactly the right thing. So some young person going into academia will say
to themself, "Look, I'm going to be a real radical here" -and you can be, as
long as you adapt yourself to these categories which guarantee that you'll
never ask the right questions, and that you'll never even look at the right
questions. But you don't fee/like you're selling out, you're not saying "I'm
working for the ruling class" or anything like that-you're not, you're being a
Marxist economist or something. But the effect is, they've totally
neutralized you.
Alright, all of these are subtle forms of control, with the effect of preventing serious insight into the way that power actually works in the society. And it makes very good sense for a system to be set up like that:
powerful institutions don't want to be investigated, obviously. Why would
they? They don't want the public to know how they work-maybe the people
inside them understand how they work, but they don't want anybody else to
know, because that would threaten and undermine their power. So one
should expect the institutions to function in such a way as to protect
themselves-and some of the ways in which they protect themselves are by
various subtle techniques of ideological control like these.
Cruder Methods of Control
Then aside from all that, there are also crude methods of control. So if
some young political scientist or economist decides they are going to try to

Chapter Seven

241

Well, Japan has run its economy pretty much the same way we do, except with one crucial difference. Instead of using the military system, the
way they've worked their public subsidies in Japan is they have a government ministry, M.LT.L [the Ministry of International Trade and Industry],
which sits down with the big corporations and conglomerates and banking
firms, and plans their economic system for the next couple years-they plan
how much consumption there's going to be, and how much investment
there's going to be, and where the investment should go, and so on. Well,
that's more efficient. And since Japan is a very disciplined and obedient society culturally, the population there just does what they tell them, and nobody ever asks any questions about it.
Alright, to see how this difference played out over the years, just look at
the "Star Wars" program in the United States, for example. Star Wars [the
Strategic Defense Initiative] is the pretext for a huge amount of research
and development spending through the Pentagon system here-it's our way
of funding the new generation of computer technology, lasers, new software, and so on. Well, if you look at the distribution of expenses for Star
Wars, it turns out that it was virtually the same allocation of funding as was
made through the Japanese state-directed economic system in the same time
period: in those same years, M.LT.!. made about the same judgments about
how to distribute their resources as we did, they spent about the same
proportion of money in lasers, and the same proportion in software, and so
on.13 And the reason is that all of these planners make approximately the
same judgments about the likely new technologies.
Well, why was Japan so competitive with the U.S. economically, despite
highly inauspicious conditions? There are a lot of reasons. But the main
reason is that they directed their public subsidy straight to the commercial
market. So to work on lasers, they tried to figure out ways of producing
lasers for the commercial market, and they do it pretty well. But when we
want to develop lasers for the commercial market, what we do is pour the
money into the Pentagon, which then tries to work out a way to use a laser
to shoot down a missile ten thousand miles away-and if they can work that
out, then they hope there'll be some commercial spin-offs that come out of
it all. Okay, that's less efficient. And since the Japanese are no dumber than
we are, and they have an efficient system of state-coordination while we
have an inefficient one, over the years they succeeded in the economic
competition.
Well, these are major phenomena of modern life-but where do you go to
study them in the universities or the academic profession? That's a very interesting question. You don't go to the economics department, because
that's not what they look at: the real hot-shot economics departments are interested in abstract models of how a pure free-enterprise economy worksyou know, generalizations to ten-dimensional space of some nonexistent
free-market system. You don't go to the political science department, because they're concerned with electoral statistics, and voting patterns, and

242

Understanding Power

micro-bureaucracy-like the way one government bureaucrat talks to another
in some detailed air. You don't go to the anthropology department, because
they're studying hill tribesmen in New Guinea. You don't go to the
sociology department, because they're studying crime in the ghettos. In fact,
you don't go anywhere-there isn't any field that deals with these topics.
There's no journal that deals with them. In fact, there is no academic
profession that is concerned with the central problems of modern society.
Now, you can go to the business school, and there they'll talk about thembecause those people are in the real world. But not in the academic departments: nobody there is going to tell you what's really going on in the world.
14

And it's extremely important that there not be a field that studies these
questions-because if there ever were such a field, people might come to understand too much, and in a relatively free society like ours, they might
start to do something with that understanding. Well, no institution is going
to encourage that. I mean, there's nothing in what I just said that you
couldn't explain to junior high school students, it's all pretty
straightforward. But it's not what you study in a junior high Civics coursewhat you study there is propaganda about the way systems are supposed to
work but don't.
Incidentally, part of the genius of this aspect of the higher education system is that it can get people to sell out even while they think they're doing
exactly the right thing. So some young person going into academia will say
to themself, "Look, I'm going to be a real radical here"-and you can be, as
long as you adapt yourself to these categories which guarantee that you'll
never ask the right questions, and that you'll never even look at the right
questions. But you don't feel like you're selling out, you're not saying "I'm
working for the ruling class" or anything like that-you're not, you're being a
Marxist economist or something. But the effect is, they've totally
neutralized you.
Alright, all of these are subtle forms of control, with the effect of preventing serious insight into the way that power actually works in the society. And it makes very good sense for a system to be set up like that:
powerful institutions don't want to be investigated, obviously. Why would
they? They don't want the public to know how they work-maybe the people
inside them understand how they work, but they don't want anybody else to
know, because that would threaten and undermine their power. So one
should expect the institutions to function in such a way as to protect
themselves-and some of the ways in which they protect themselves are by
various subtle techniques of ideological control like these.
Cruder Methods of Control
Then aside from all that, there are also crude methods of control. So if
some young political scientist or economist decides they are going to try to

Chapter Seven

243

ask these kinds of questions, the chances are they're going to be marginalized in some fashion, or else be weeded out of the institution altogether. At
the extreme end, there have been repeated university purges in the United
States. During the 1950s, for example, the universities were just cleaned out
of dissident thought-people were fired on all kinds of grounds, or not allowed to teach things. And the effects of that were very strong. Then during
the late 1960s, when the political ferment really got going, the purges began
again-and often they were just straight political firings, not even obscured.15
For instance, a lot of the best Asia scholars from the United States are now
teaching in Australia and japan-because they couldn't keep jobs in the U.S.,
they had the wrong ideas. Australia has some of the best Southeast Asia
scholars in the world, and they're mostly Americans who were young
scholars in the Sixties and couldn't make it into the American academic
system, because they thought the wrong things. So if you want to study
Cambodia with a top American scholar, you basically have to go to
Australia.16 One of the best japan historians in the world [Herbert Bix] is
teaching in a Japanese university-he's American, but he can't get a job in the
United States.
Or let me just tell you a story about M.LT., which is pretty revealing. A
young political science professor-who's by now one of the top people in the
field, incidentally [Thomas Ferguson]-was appointed at M.LT. as an
assistant professor right after he got his Ph.D. from Princeton; he's very
radical, but he's also extremely smart, so the department just needed him.
Well, one day I was sitting in my office and he came over fuming. He told
me that the chairman of his department had just come into his office and
told him straight out: "If you ever want to get tenure in this department,
keep away from anything after the New Deal; you can write all of your radical stuff up to the New Deal, but if you try and do it for the post-New Deal
period, you're never going to get tenure in this department." 17 He just told
him straight out. Usually you're not told it straight out, but you get to understand it-you get to understand it from the reactions you receive.
This kind of stuff also happens with graduate students. I'm what's called
an "Institute Professor" at M.LT., which means I can teach courses in any
department of the university. And over the years I've taught all over the
place-but if I even get near Political Science, you can feel the bad vibes
starting. So in other departments, I'm often asked to be on students' Ph.D.
committees, but in Political Science it's virtually never happened-and the
few times it has happened, it's always been Third World women. And
there's a reason for that: Third World women have a little bit of extra space
to maneuver in, because the department doesn't want to appear too overtly
racist or too overtly sexist, so there are some things they can do that other
people can't.
Well, a few years ago, one very smart woman graduate student in the Political Science Department wanted to do her dissertation on the media and
Southern Africa, and she wanted me to be on her Ph.D. committee. Okay,

244

Understanding Power

it's a topic that I'm interested in, and I've worked on it probably more than
anybody else there, so there was just no way for them to say I couldn't do it.
Then the routine started. The first stage in the doctoral process is that the
candidate has a meeting with a couple of faculty members and presents her
proposal. Usually two faculty members show up, that's about it. This time it
was different: they circulated a notice through the department saying that
every faculty member had to show up-and the reason was, I was going to
be there, and they had to combat this baleful influence. So everybody
showed up.
Well, the woman started presenting her dissertation proposal, and you
could just see people turning pale. Somebody asked her, "What's your hypothesis?"-you're supposed to have a hypothesis-and it was that media
coverage of Southern Africa is going to be influenced by corporate
interests. People were practically passing out and falling out the windows.
Then starts the critical analysis: "What's your methodology going to be?
What tests are you going to use?" And gradually an apparatus was set up
and a level of proof demanded that you just can't meet in the social
sciences. It wasn't, "I'm going to read the editorials and figure out what they
say"you had to count the words, and do all sorts of statistical nonsense, and
so on and so forth. But she fought it through, she just continued fighting.
They ultimately required so much junk in her thesis, so much irrelevant,
phony social-scientific junk, numbers and charts and meaningless business,
that you could barely pick out the content from the morass of methodology.
But she did finally make it through-just because she was willing to fight it
out. Now, you know, you can do that-but it's tough. And some people really
get killed.
The Fate of an Honest Intellectual
I'll tell you another, last case-and there are many others like this. Here's a
story which is really tragic. How many of you know about Joan Peters, the
book by Joan Peters? There was this best-seller a few years ago [in 1984], it
went through about ten printings, by a woman named Joan Peters-or at
least, signed by Joan Peters-ealled From Time ImmemoriaUs It was a big
scholarly-looking book with lots of footnotes, which purported to show that
the Palestinians were all recent immigrants [i.e. to the Jewishsettled areas of
the former Palestine, during the British mandate years of 1920 to 1948].
And it was very popular-it got literally hundreds of rave reviews, and no
negative reviews: the Washington Post, the New York Times, everybody
was just raving about it.19 Here was this book which proved that there were
really no Palestinians! Of course, the implicit message was, if Israel kicks
them all out there's no moral issue, because they're just recent immigrants
who came in because the Jews had built up the country. And there was all
kinds of demographic analysis in it, and a big profes-

Chapter Seven

245

sor of demography at the University of Chicago [Philip M. Hauser] authenticated it.20 That was the big intellectual hit for that year: Saul Bellow, Barbara Tuchman, everybody was talking about it as the greatest thing since
chocolate cake.21
Well, one graduate student at Princeton, a guy named Norman Finkelstein, started reading through the book. He was interested in the history of
Zionism, and as he read the book he was kind of surprised by some of the
things it said. He's a very careful student, and he started checking the references-and it turned out that the whole thing was a hoax, it was completely
faked: probably it had been put together by some intelligence agency or
something like that. Well, Finkelstein wrote up a short paper of just preliminary findings, it was about twenty-five pages or so, and he sent it around to
I think thirty people who were interested in the topic, scholars in the field
and so on, saying: "Here's what I've found in this book, do you think it's
worth pursuing?"
Well, he got back one answer, from me. I told him, yeah, I think it's an
interesting topic, but I warned him, if you follow this, you're going to get in
trouble-because you're going to expose the American intellectual community as a gang of frauds, and they are not going to like it, and they're going
to destroy you. So I said: if you want to do it, go ahead, but be aware of
what you're getting into. It's an important issue, it makes a big difference
whether you eliminate the moral basis for driving out a population-it's
preparing the basis for some real horrors-so a lot of people's lives could be
at stake. But your life is at stake too, I told him, because if you pursue this,
your career is going to be ruined.
Well, he didn't believe me. We became very close friends after this, I
didn't know him before. He went ahead and wrote up an article, and he
started submitting it to journals. Nothing: they didn't even bother responding. I finally managed to place a piece of it in In These Times, a tiny leftwing journal published in Illinois, where some of you may have seen it. 22
Otherwise nothing, no response. Meanwhile his professors-this is Princeton
University, supposed to be a serious place-stopped talking to him: they
wouldn't make appointments with him, they wouldn't read his papers, he
basically had to quit the program.
By this time, he was getting kind of desperate, and he asked me what to
do. I gave him what I thought was good advice, but what turned out to be
bad advice: I suggested that he shift over to a different department, where I
knew some people and figured he'd at least be treated decently. That turned
out to be wrong. He switched over, and when he got to the point of writing
his thesis he literally could not get the faculty to read it, he couldn't get
them to come to his thesis defense. Finally, out of embarrassment, they
granted him a Ph.D.-he's very smart, incidentally-but they will not even
write a letter for him saying that he was a student at Princeton University. I
mean, sometimes you have students for whom it's hard to write good letters
of recommendation, because you really didn't think they were very good-

246

Understanding Power

but you can write something, there are ways of doing these things. This guy
was good, but he literally cannot get a letter.
He's now living in a little apartment somewhere in New York City, and
he's a part-time social worker working with teenage drop-outs. Very promising scholar-if he'd done what he was told, he would have gone on and
right now he'd be a professor somewhere at some big university. Instead
he's working part-time with disturbed teenaged kids for a couple thousand
dollars a year.23 That's a lot better than a death squad, it's true-it's a whole
lot better than a death squad. But those are the techniques of control that are
around.
But let me just go on with the Joan Peters story. Finkelstein's very persistent: he took a summer off and sat in the New York Public Library,
where he went through every single reference in the book-and he found a
record of fraud that you cannot believe. Well, the New York intellectual
community is a pretty small place, and pretty soon everybody knew about
this, everybody knew the book was a fraud and it was going to be exposed
sooner or later. The one journal that was smart enough to react intelligently
was the New York Review of Books-they knew that the thing was a sham,
but the editor didn't want to offend his friends, so he just didn't run a review
at all. That was the one journal that didn't run a review.
Meanwhile, Finkelstein was being called in by big professors in the field
who were telling him, "Look, call off your crusade; you drop this and we'll
take care of you, we'll make sure you get a job," all this kind of stuff. But
he kept doing it-he kept on and on. Every time there was a favorable
review, he'd write a letter to the editor which wouldn't get printed; he was
doing whatever he could do. We approached the publishers and asked them
if they were going to respond to any of this, and they said no-and they were
right. Why should they respond? They had the whole system buttoned up,
there was never going to be a critical word about this in the United States.
But then they made a technical error: they allowed the book to appear in
England, where you can't control the intellectual community quite as easily.
Well, as soon as I heard that the book was going to come out in England,
I immediately sent copies of Finkelstein's work to a number of British
scholars and journalists who are interested in the Middle East-and they
were ready. As soon as the book appeared, it was just demolished, it was
blown out of the water. Every major journal, the Times Literary
Supplement, the London Review, the Observer, everybody had a review
saying, this doesn't even reach the level of nonsense, of idiocy. A lot of the
criticism used Finkelstein's work without any acknowledgment, I should
say-but about the kindest word anybody said about the book was
"ludicrous," or "preposterous.,,24
Well, people here read British reviews-if you're in the American intellectual community, you read the Times Literary Supplement and the London Review, so it began to get a little embarrassing. You started getting
back-tracking: people started saying, "Well, look, I didn't really say the

Chapter Seven

247

book was good, I just said it's an interesting topic," things like that. At that
point, the New York Review swung into action, and they did what they always do in these circumstances. See, there's like a routine that you go
through-if a book gets blown out of the water in England in places people
here will see, or if a book gets praised in England, you have to react. And if
it's a book on Israel, there's a standard way of doing it: you get an Israeli
scholar to review it. That's called covering your ass-because whatever an
Israeli scholar says, you're pretty safe: no one can accuse the journal of
anti-Semitism, none of the usual stuff works.
So after the Peters book got blown out of the water in England, the New
York Review assigned it to a good person actually, in fact Israel's leading
specialist on Palestinian nationalism [Yehoshua Porath], someone who
knows a lot about the subject. And he wrote a review, which they then
didn't publish-it went on for almost a year without the thing being published; nobody knows exactly what was going on, but you can guess that
there must have been a lot of pressure not to publish it. Eventually it was
even written up in the New York Times that this review wasn't getting published, so finally some version of it did appear.25 It was critical, it said the
book is nonsense and so on, but it cut corners, the guy didn't say what he
knew.26
Actually, the Israeli reviews in general were extremely critical: the reaction of the Israeli press was that they hoped the book would not be widely
read, because ultimately it would be harmful to the Jews-sooner or later it
would get exposed, and then it would just look like a fraud and a hoax, and
it would reflect badly on IsraelY They underestimated the American intellectual community, I should say.
Anyhow, by that point the American intellectual community realized that
the Peters book was an embarrassment, and it sort of disappearednobody
talks about it anymore. I mean, you still find it at newsstands in the airport
and so on, but the best and the brightest know that they are not supposed to
talk about it anymore: because it was exposed and they were exposed.
Well, the point is, what happened to Finkelstein is the kind of thing that
can happen when you're an honest critic-and we could go on and on with
other cases like that. [Editors' Note: Finkelstein has since published several
books with independent presses.]
Still, in the universities or in any other institution, you can often find
some dissidents hanging around in the woodwork-and they can survive in
one fashion or another, particularly if they get community support. But if
they become too disruptive or too obstreperous-or you know, too effectivethey're likely to be kicked out. The standard thing, though, is that they won't
make it within the institutions in the first place, particularly if they were
that way when they were young-they'll simply be weeded out somewhere
along the line. So in most cases, the people who make it through the
institutions and are able to remain in them have already internalized the

248

Understanding Power

right kinds of beliefs: it's not a problem for them to be obedient, they already are obedient, that's how they got there. And that's pretty much how
the ideological control system perpetuates itself in the schools-that's the
basic story of how it operates, I think.
Forging Working-Class Culture
MAN: Noam, I want to turn for a moment to people who weren't sent
through the ideological control system of the schools, to see what kind of
independent minds people today should be struggling to foster. I've often
heard you talk about the insights that guided the early labor movement in
the United States at the beginning of the industrial revolution in the 1820s.
You say that social movements today are going to have to start by regaining
some of that understanding. My question is, who were those people exactlywas it mostly European immigrants to the United States?
No, it's what were called at the time the "Lowell mill-girls"-meaning
young women who came off the farms to work in factories. In fact, a good
deal of the labor organizing in the nineteenth century in the United States
was done by women, because just like today in the Third World, it was assumed that the most docile and controllable segment of the workforce was
women-so therefore they were the most exploited.
Remember, the early industrial revolution was built on textiles. It took
off around here-it was in Lowell and Lawrence [Massachusetts], places like
that. And very extensively the labor force was made up of women. In fact,
some of the main labor journals at the time were edited by women, and they
were young women mostly. And they were people who wanted to read,
they wanted to learn, they wanted to study-that was just considered normal
by working people back then. And they wanted to have free lives. In fact,
many of them didn't work in the mills for very long-they'd work there for a
couple years, then go back to some other life. But in the early stages of the
American labor movement, it was the Lowell mill-girls, or farmers who
were being driven off their farms by industry, who were the ones who built
up the early working-class culture.
When the big waves of European immigrants began to arrive in the
United States, the story started to change a bit, actually. See, the major
wave of immigration to the United States happened around the middle of
the nineteenth century, and the immigrants who were arriving were fleeing
from extremely impoverished parts of Europe-like Ireland, for example.
That was at the time of the Irish famine [of 1846-51], and Ireland was
being absolutely devastated by it, so a lot of people just escaped to North
America if they could.
People often forget, Ireland's the oldest colony in the world: it could
have been a rich place, just like England, but it's been a colony for 800

Chapter Seven

249

years, and it's one of the few parts of the world that was not only underdeveloped, like most colonies, but also depopulated-Ireland now has about
half the population it had in the early nineteenth century, in fact. And the
Irish famine was an economists' famine-Ireland was actually exporting food
to England during the famine, because the sacred principles of Political
Economy said that that's the way it has to be: if there's a better market for it
in England, that's where the food has to go, and you certainly couldn't send
food to Ireland, because that would have interfered with the market.28
So there was mass starvation taking place in Ireland, and the Irish immigrants who were coming to the United States were desperate for work, so
they could be forced to work for essentially nothing-the same was also true
of a lot of the people who were coming here from Southern and Eastern
Europe. And that undercut the early labor movement to a significant extentI mean, the Lowell mill-girls could not, or would not, work at the level of
the millions of immigrants who were coming in. So it took a long time
before you started to get the growth of labor organizing here again, because
the domestic workforce could just be displaced whenever it started to
protest.
And the poor immigrants who came here were treated like dogs-I) mean,
miserably treated. So for example, Irish women were used for exper- /
imentation in Mengele-style experiments in the United States in the nine- ('\tee
nth century (Mengele was a Nazi doctor who "experimented" on live
human beings]. That's not a joke-gynecological surgery was literally de- . ~ w.. vel oped
by Mengeles, who used subjects like indigent Irish women or,/ \"-' . <slaves, and just
subjected them to experiment after experiment, like thirty \' experiments, to try to
figure out how to make the procedures work. In fact,
doctors exactly like Joseph Mengele were honored for that in the United
States-you still see their pictures up on the walls in medical schools.29
/
So it wasn't a European input that brought about the American labor
movement, quite the opposite. But I mean, these were just natural reactions:
you didn't have to have any training to understand these things, you didn't
have to read Marx or anything like that. It's just degrading to have to follow
orders, and to be stuck in a place where you slave for twelve hours a day,
then go to a dormitory where they watch your morals and so onwhich is
what it was like. People simply regarded that as degrading.
It was the same with craftsmen, people who had been self-employed and
were now being forced into the factories-they wanted to be able to run their
own lives. I mean, shoemakers would hire people to read to them while they
were working-and that didn't mean read Stephen King or something, it
meant read real stuff. These were people who had libraries, and they wanted
to live lives, they wanted to control their own work-but they were being
forced into shoe-manufacturing plants in places like Lowell where they
were treated, not even like animals, like machines. And that was degrading,
and demeaning-and they fought against it. And incidentally, they weren't
fighting against it so much because it was reducing their

250

Understanding Power

economic level, which it wasn't (in fact it was probably raising it)-it was
because it was taking power out of their hands, and subordinating them to
others, and turning them into mindless tools of production. And they didn't
want that.
In fact, if you want to do some really interesting reading, one book I
would suggest is the first book of labor history that was written-ever, I
think. It came out in 1924, and it was just republished in Chicago: it's called
The Industrial Worker, by Norman Ware, and it's mostly excerpts from the
independent labor press in the United States in the mid-nineteenth century.
30 See, there was a big independent workers' press in the United States at
the time-it was about at the scale of the capitalist press, actually-and it was
run by what were called "factory girls," or by craftsmen. And it's extremely
interesting to look at.
Right through the nineteenth century, working people in the United
States were struggling against the imposition of what they described as
"degradation," "oppression," "wage slavery," "taking away our elementary
rights," "turning us into tools of production," everything that we now call
modern capitalism (which is in fact state-capitalism) they fought against for
a full century-and very bitterly, it was an extremely hard struggle. And they
were calling for "labor republicanism"-you know, "Let's go back to the
days when we were free people." "Labor" just means "people," after all.
And in fact, they also were fighting against the imposition of the mass
public education system-and rightly, because they understood exactly what
it was: a technique to beat independence out of the heads of farmers and to
turn them into docile and obedient factory workers.31 That's ultimately why
public education was instituted in the United States in the first place: to
meet the needs of newly-emerging industry. See, part of the process of
trying to develop a degraded and obedient labor force was to make the
workers stupid and passive-and mass education was one of the ways that
was achieved. And of course, there was also a much broader effort to destroy the independent working-class intellectual culture that had developed,
which ranged from a huge amount of just outright force, to more subtle
techniques like propaganda and public relations campaigns.
And those efforts have been sustained right to this day, in fact. So labor
unions have by now been virtually wiped out in the United States, in part
by a huge amount of business propaganda, running from cinema to almost
everything, and through a lot of other techniques as well. But the whole
process took a long time-I'm old enough to remember what the workingclass culture was like in the United States: there was still a high level of it
when I was growing up in the late 1930s. It took a long time to beat it out
of workers' heads and turn them into passive tools; it took a long time to
make people accept that this type of exploitation is the only alternative, so
they'd better just forget about their rights and say, "Okay, I'm degraded."
So the first thing that has to happen, I think, is we have to recover some
of that old understanding. I mean, it all starts with cultural changes. We

Chapter Seven

251

have to dismantle all of this stuff culturally: we've got to change people's
minds, their spirits, and help them recover what was common understanding in a more civilized period, like a century ago on the shop floors of Lowell. If that kind of understanding could be natural among a huge part of the
general population in the nineteenth century, it can be natural again today.
And it's something we've really got to work on now.
The Fraud of Modern Economics
MAN: Noam, you mentioned Ireland being forced to export food to England during the Irish famine because of the supposed demands of the free
market. How exactly did that kind of "free market" economic thinking get
instituted as legitimate in the universities and in the popular ideology as a
whole over the years-for instance, the work of the Social Darwinists [who
claimed that natural selection and "survival of the fittest" determine individual and societal wealth], and of Malthus [early-nineteenth-century
economist who argued that poverty was inevitable and population growth
should be checked by famine, war, and disease], and others who in various
ways blamed the poor for being poor?
Malthus gets kind of a bad press, actually: he's singled out as the guy
who said that people should just be left to starve if they can't support themselves-but really that was pretty much the line of classical economics in
general. In fact, Malthus was one of the founders of classical economics,
right alongside of guys like David Ricardo.
Malthus's point was basically this: if you don't have independent wealth,
and you can't sell your labor on the market at a level at which you can survive, then you have no right being here-go to the workhouse prison or go
somewhere else. And in those days, "go somewhere else" meant go to
North America, or to Australia, and so on. Now, he wasn't saying it was
anyone's fault if they were poor and had to remove themselves; he was saying, it's a law of nature that this is the way it has to be.32 Ricardo in fact said
that it was true at the level of "the principle of gravitation" -and of course,
to try to interfere with a law of nature like that only makes things worse.33
So what both Malthus and Ricardo were arguing, sort of in parallel, was
that you only harm the poor by making them believe that they have rights
other than what they can win on the market, like a basic right to live, because that kind of right interferes with the market, and with efficiency, and
with growth and so on-so ultimately people will just be worse off if you try
to recognize them. And as you suggest, those ideas are basically still taught
today-I don't think the free-market ideology that's taught in university
economics departments right now is very much different. Sure, you have
more mathematical formulas and so on today, but really it's pretty much the
same story.

252

Understanding Power

MAN: But how did that thinking get instituted?
How did it get instituted? As a weapon of class warfare. Actually, the
history of this is kind of intriguing-and as far as I know, there's only one
book about it: it's by a good economic historian named Rajani Kanth, who
was just rewarded for his efforts by being thrown out of the University of
Utah. But he goes through it all, and it's very revealing.34
You see, during the early stages of the industrial revolution, as England
was coming out of a feudal-type society and into what's basically a statecapitalist system, the rising bourgeoisie there had a problem. In a traditional
society like the feudal system, people had a certain place, and they had
certain rights-in fact, they had what was called at the time a "right to live." I
mean, under feudalism it may have been a lousy right, but nevertheless
people were assumed to have some natural entitlement for survival. But
with the rise of what we call capitalism, that right had to be destroyed: people had to have it knocked out of their heads that they had any automatic
"right to live" beyond what they could win for themselves on the labor
market. And that was the main point of classical economics.35
Remember the context in which all of this was taking place: classical
economics developed after a period in which a large part of the English
population had been forcibly driven off the land they had been farming for
centuries-that was by force, it wasn't a pretty picture [i.e. intensive enclosure of communal lands by acts of Parliament occurred between 1750 and
1860]. In fact, very likely one of the main reasons why England led the industrial revolution was just that they had been much more violent in driving
people off the land than in other places. For instance, in France a lot of
people were able to remain on the land, and therefore they resisted industrialization more.36
But even after the rising bourgeoisie in England had driven millions of
peasants off the land, there was a period when the population's "right to
live" still was preserved by what we would today call "welfare." There was
a set of laws in England which gave people rights, called the "Poor
Laws" [initially and most comprehensively codified in 1601]-which
essentially kept you alive if you couldn't survive otherwise; they provided
sort of a minimum level of subsistence, like subsidies on food and so on.
And there was also something called the "Corn Laws" [dating in varying
forms from the twelfth century], which gave landlords certain rights beyond
those they could get on the market-they raised the price of corn, that sort of
thing. And together, these laws were considered among the main
impediments to the new rising British industrial class-so therefore they just
had to go.
Well, those people needed an ideology to support their effort to knock
out of people's heads the idea that they had this basic right to live, and that's
what classical economics was about--dassical economics said: no one has
any right to live, you only have a right to what you can gain for yourself on
the labor market. And the founders of classical economics in fact said

Chapter Seven

253

they'd developed a "scientific theory" of it, with-as they put it-"the certainty
of the principle of gravitation."
Alright, by the 1830s, political conditions in England had changed
enough so that the rising bourgeoisie were able to kill the Poor Laws [they
were significantly limited in 1832], and then later they managed to do away
with the Corn Laws [in 1846]. And by around 1840 or 1845, they won the
elections and took over the government. Then at that point, a very interesting thing happened. They gave up the theory, and Political Economy
changed.
It changed for a number of reasons. For one thing, these guys had won,
so they didn't need it so much as an ideological weapon anymore. For another, they recognized that they themselves needed a powerful interventionist state to defend industry from the hardships of competition in the open
market-as they always had in fact. And beyond that, eliminating people's
"right to live" was starting to have some negative side-effects. First of all, it
was causing riots all over the place: for a long period, the British army was
mostly preoccupied with putting down riots across England. Then something even worse happened-the population started to organize: you got the
beginnings of an organized labor movement, and later the Chartist
movement [an 1838-48 popular campaign for Parliamentary reform], and
then a socialist movement developed. And at that point, the elites in England recognized that the game just had to be called off, or else they really
would be in trouble-so by the time you get to the second half of the nineteenth century, things like John Stuart Mill's Principles of Political Economy, which gives kind of a social-democratic line, were becoming the
reigning ideology.
See, the "science" happens to be a very flexible one: you can change it to
do whatever you feel like, it's that kind of "science." So by the middle of
the nineteenth century, the "science" had changed, and now it turned out
that laissez faire [the idea that the economy functions best without
government interference] was a bad thing after all-and what you got instead
were the intellectual foundations for what's called the "welfare state." And
in fact, for a century afterwards, "laissez faire" was basically a dirty wordnobody talked about it anymore. And what the "science" now said was that
you had better give the population some way of surviving, or else they're
going to challenge your right to rule. You can take away their right to live,
but then they're going to take away your right to rule-and that's no good, so
ways have to be found to accommodate them.
Well, it wasn't until recent years that laissez-faire ideology was revived
again-and again, it was as a weapon of class warfare. I mean, as far as I can
see, the principles of classical economics in effect are still taught: I don't
think what's taught in the University of Chicago Economics Department
today is all that different, what's called "neo-liberalism" [an economic
stance stressing cutbacks in social services, stable currencies, and balanced
budgets]. And it doesn't have any more validity than it had in the early nine-

254

Understanding Power

teenth century-in fact, it has even less. At least in the early nineteenth century, Ricardo's and Malthus's assumptions had some relation to reality.
Today those assumptions have no relation to reality.
Look: the basic assumption of the classical economists was that labor is
highly mobile and capital is relatively immobile-that's required, that's crucial to proving all their nice theorems. That was the reason they could say,
"If you can't get enough to survive on the labor market, go someplace else"because you could go someplace else: after the native populations of places
like the United States and Australia and Tasmania were exterminated or
driven away, then yeah, poor Europeans could go someplace else. So in the
early nineteenth century, labor was indeed mobile. And back then, capital
was indeed immobile-first because "capital" primarily meant land, and you
can't move land, and also because to the extent that there was investment, it
was very local: like, you didn't have communications systems that allowed
for easy transfers of money all around the world, like we do today.
So in the early nineteenth century, the assumption that labor is mobile
and capital is immobile was more or less realistic-and on the basis of that
assumption, you could try to prove things about comparative advantage and
all this stuff you learn in school about Portugal and wine and so on [Ricardo's most famous hypothetical for demonstrating how free trade could be
mutually advantageous to participating countries involved England concentrating on selling cloth and Portugal wine].
Incidentally, if you want to know how well those theorems actually
work, just compare Portugal and England after a hundred years of trying
them out-growing wine versus industrializing as possible modes of development. But let's put that aside ...
Well, by now the assumptions underpinning these theories are not only
false-they're the opposite of the truth. By now labor is immobile, through
immigration restrictions and so on, and capital is highly mobile, primarily
because of technological changes. So none of the results work anymore.
But you're still taught them, you're still taught the theories exactly as
beforeeven though the reality today is the exact opposite of what was
assumed in the early nineteenth century. I mean, if you look at some of the
fancier economists, Paul Krugman and so on, they've got all kinds of little
tricks here and there to make the results not quite so grotesquely ridiculous
as they'd otherwise be. But fundamentally, it all just is pretty ridiculous.
I mean, if capital is mobile and labor is immobile, there's no reason why
mobile capital shouldn't seek absolute advantage and play one national
workforce against another, go wherever the labor is cheapest and thereby
drive everybody's standard of living down. In fact, that's exactly what we're
seeing in N.A.F.T.A. [the North American Free Trade Agreement] and all
these other international trade agreements which are being instituted right
now. Nothing in these abstract economic models actually works in the real
world. It doesn't matter how many footnotes they put in, or how many ways

Chapter Seven

255

they tinker around the edges. The whole enterprise is totally rotten at the
core: it has no relation to reality anymore-and furthermore, it never did.
The Real Market
So take a look at one of the things you don't say if you're an economist
within one of the ideological institutions, although surely every economist
has to know it. Take the fact that there is not a single case on record in history of any country that has developed successfully through adherence to
"free market" principles: none. Certainly not the United States. I mean, the
United States has always had extensive state intervention in the economy,
right from the earliest days-we would be exporting fur right now if we were
following the principles of comparative advantage.
Look, the reason why the industrial revolution took off in places like
Lowell and Lawrence is because of high protectionist tariffs the U.S. government set up to keep out British goods. And the same thing runs right up
to today: like, we would not have successful high-tech industry in the
United States today if it wasn't for a huge public subsidy to advanced industry, mostly through the Pentagon system and N.A.S.A. and so on-that
doesn't have the vaguest relation to a "free market."
In fact, if you want a good illustration, just read today's New York Times.
There's a story on the business page about how we've got a funny kind of
economic recovery going on in the country right now: there's a lot of
economic growth, but not many good new jobs-you know, big surprise.
And they use one factory as an example, a stove factory that's being set up
in Tulsa by the Whirlpool corporation. Well, the last paragraph of the arti- \ s0 de points
out how the "free market" really works: the reason why ~.\, Whirlpool decided to put
the factory in Tulsa instead of, say, in Mexico, is
that the taxpayers in Tulsa County are going to pay 25 percent of the cor- L.poration's capital costS.37 Okay, that's how the free market really works- ~ in fact,
that's how it's a/ways worked, from the early days of the industrial revolution right
up until this morning, without any known exception.38
As a matter of fact, the United States has been the most economically
protectionist country in history. We've traditionally had the highest protectionist tariffs in the world, so much so that one leading economic historian
in a recent book (published by the University of Chicago Press, no less) describes us as "the mother country and bastion of modern protectionism." 39
So for example, in the late nineteenth century, when Europe was actually
toying around with laissez faire for a brief period, American tariffs were
five to ten times as high as theirs-and that was the fastest economic growth
period in American history.4o
And it goes on right until the present. The United States developed a
steel industry a century ago because it radically violated the rules of the
"free market," and it was able to recover its steel industry in the last decade
or so

256

Understanding Power

by doing things like restricting imports from abroad, destroying labor
unions to drive down wages, and slamming huge tariffs on foreign stee1.41 I
mean, the Reaganites always talked enthusiastically about "market forces,"
but they refused to allow them to function-and for a very simple reason: if
market forces had been allowed to function, the United States would no
longer have an automobile industry, or a microchip industry, or computers,
or electronics, because they would have just been wiped out by the
Japanese. So therefore the Reaganites closed off American markets and
poured in huge amounts of public funds. And actually, they were perfectly
frank about it to the business community-though of course, not to the
public. So when he was Secretary of the Treasury, James Baker proudly
proclaimed to a business audience in 1987 that Ronald Reagan "has granted
more import relief to U.S. industry than any of his predecessors in more
than half a century"-which was far too modest, actually; Reagan probably
provided more import relief to industry than all his predecessors combined
in that period.42
Of course, the "free market" ideology is very useful-it's a weapon against
the general population here, because it's an argument against social
spending, and it's a weapon against poor people abroad, because we can
hold it up to them and say "You guys have to follow these rules," then just
go ahead and rob them. But nobody really pays any attention to this stuff
when it comes to actual planning-and no one ever has.
So there was just a British study of the hundred leading transnational
corporations in the "Fortune 500," and it found that of the hundred, every
single one of them had benefited from what's called "state industrial policy"-that is, from some form of government intervention in the country in
which they're based. And of the hundred, they said at least twenty had been
saved from total collapse by state intervention at one point or another. For
instance, the Lockheed corporation was going under in the early 1970s, and
the Nixon administration just bailed them out with public funds.43 Okay, so
they're back in business. And now they stay in business because the public
pays for C-130s [ military aircraft], and upgrading F-16s, and the F-22
project, and so on-none of which has anything to do with a "free market"
either.
Or take the fact that so many people live in the suburbs and everybody
has to drive their own car everywhere. Was that a result of the "free market"? No, it was because the U.S. government carried out a massive socialengineering project in the 1950s to destroy the public transportation system
in favor of expanding a highly inefficient system based on cars and
airplanes-because that's what benefits big industry. It started with corporate
conspiracies to buy up and eliminate streetcar systems, and then continued
with huge public subsidies to build the highway system and encourage an
extremely inefficient and environmentally destructive alternative. That's
what led to the suburbanization of the country-so you get huge shopping
malls in the suburbs, and devastation in the inner cities.44

Chapter Seven

257

But these policies were a result of planning-they had nothing to do with the
"free market."
Actually, the most dramatic example of these "market distortions" that I
can think of-which I suspect is never even taught in economics coursesconcerns the reason why the United States had an industrial revolution in
the first place. Remember, the industrial revolution was fueled by textiles,
meaning one commodity: cotton. And cotton was cheap, that was crucially
important. Well, why was cotton cheap? Was it because of market forces?
No. Cotton was cheap because they exterminated the native population here
and brought in slaves-that's why cotton was cheap. Genocide and slavery:
try to imagine a more severe market distortion than that.
Other countries who had their own cotton resources also tried to start on
industrial revolutions-but they didn't get very far, because England had
more guns, and stopped them by force. Egypt, for example, had its own cotton resources, and started on an industrial revolution at about the same time
as the United States did, around 1820-but the British weren't going to
tolerate an economic competitor in the Eastern Mediterranean, so they just
stopped it by force. Okay, no industrial revolution in Egypt.45
The same thing also happened in Britain's earliest "experiment" with
these ideas, in what was called Bengal, in India. In fact, Bengal was one of
the first places colonized in the eighteenth century, and when Robert Clive
[British conqueror] first landed there, he described it as a paradise: Dacca,
he said, is just like London, and they in fact referred to it as "the Manchester of India." It was rich and populous, there was high-quality cotton, agriculture, advanced industry, a lot of resources, jute, all sorts of things-it was
in fact comparable to England in its manufacturing level, and really looked
like it was going to take off. Well, look at it today: Dacca, "the Manchester
of India," is the capital of Bangladesh-the absolute symbol of disaster. 46
And that's because the British just despoiled the country and destroyed it,
by the equivalent of what we would today call "structural adjustment" [i.e.
economic policies from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund
which expose Third World economies to foreign penetration and control].
In fact, India generally was a real competitor with England: as late as the
1820s, the British were learning advanced techniques of steel-making there,
India was building ships for the British navy at the time of the Napoleonic
Wars [1803-1815], they had a developed textiles industry, they were
producing more iron than all of Europe combined-so the British just
proceeded to de-industrialize the country by force and turn it into an impoverished rural society.47 Was that competition in the "free market"?
And it goes on and on: the United States annexed Texas [in 1845], and
one of the main reasons for that was to ensure that the U.S. achieved a monopoly on cotton-which was the oil of the nineteenth century, it was what
really fueled the industrial economies. So the American leadership figured
that if they could take Texas, which was a major cotton-producing area,

258

Understanding Power

then they would be able to strangle England economically. See, England
was the main enemy at that time, they hated England: it was much more
powerful militarily than the United States, it kept us from conquering
Canada and seizing Cuba the way elites here wanted to-and in fact, the only
reason the American colonists had been able to defeat England in the
American Revolution in the first place was that the French military had
massively intervened in the colonial uprising here to help overthrow British
power.48 So England was the real enemy. And if you read the Jacksonian
Democrats, Presidents Polk and Tyler and so on, they were saying: if we
can get Texas, we can bring England to our feet and gain mastery of the
trade of the world. In fact, the worst charges, paranoid charges, that were
leveled against Saddam Hussein before the Gulf War apply precisely to the
Jacksonian Democrats: they wanted to monopolize the main resource of the
world so they could bring everybody else to their feet.49
And exactly the same lessons apply today. Today it's oil that's at the center of the industrial economies. And why is oil cheap? Well, that's what you
pay your taxes for: a large part of the Pentagon system exists to make sure
that oil prices stay within a certain range-not too low, because Western
economies and energy corporations depend on the profits from it, but not
too high, because that might interfere with what's called the "efficiency" of
international trade [i.e. because transport and other costs of trade rise with
the oil price]. Well, trade is only "efficient" because a lot of force and international violence keeps oil prices from going too high, so if you really
wanted to measure the "efficiency of trade," you'd have to figure in all of
the other costs which make it that way, like the costs of the Pentagon for
one. And if anyone ever did that, you couldn't possibly say that trade is "efficient." If anybody ever bothered to calculate these things, the efficiency of
trade would drop very, very low, and it would in fact prove to be extremely
inefficient.
I mean, these market distortions are not footnotes-they are absolutely
huge phenomena. Nobody ever tries to estimate them, because economics is
not a serious field-but people in the business world know about them
perfectly well, which is why they've always called upon a powerful state to
protect them from market discipline: they don't want market discipline any
more than they want democratic control, and they've always blocked it.
And the same is true of just about every aspect of any developed economy
there is.
Automation
Well, let's just take one last case of this, an extremely important and revealing one: let's look at automation. I mean, it's standardly claimed these
days that the reason why the population is suffering, why people have been
losing jobs at a mad rate, real wages have been going down for the last
twenty-five years and so on, is due to, as Ricardo said, "laws like the prin-

Chapter Seven

259

ciple of gravitation" -inexorable market forces are making it that way, like
automation, or the efficiency of international trade. That's the standard argument: these things are inevitable because the market is just imposing
them on us.50 It's all total bullshit. I mentioned one reason why the "efficiency of trade" argument is mostly a fraud, now let's look at automation.
Well, it's true that automation is "efficient"-like, by market principles,
automation saves businessmen money and drives workers out of jobs. But it
didn't get that way because of the market, not at all: it only got that way
through intensive and prolonged funding and development through the state
sector-that's market distortion. I mean, for thirty years automation was
developed through the military system in the United States, and the reason
why it took so long and cost so much is that automation was so inefficient
to begin with that it couldn't possibly have survived in the market-so
therefore automation was developed the same way we develop most high
technology: through the public sector.
See, in the Air Force and the Navy (where most of this took place), nobody cares about costs-because the taxpayer's paying, so the development
can be as expensive and inefficient as you like. And in that way, they were
able to develop automation to the point where it could then be used to drive
people out of work and make profits for corporations. For instance, take the
history of automated numerical control of metal-cutting machines [i.e.
translation of part specifications into mathematical information that can be
fed into machines without the need for skilled machinists]. That was developed through the Air Force, it went on for decades, and finally it got efficient enough so that it could be handed over to the corporations and they
could then throw out their workers. But it didn't happen through market
forces, not at all-it was the result of massive state intervention.
Furthermore, if you look at the kind of automation that was developed,
you see precisely what workers in the early labor movement were complaining about: being turned into mindless tools of production. I mean, automation could have been designed in such a way as to use the skills of
skilled machinists and to eliminate management-there's nothing inherent in
automation that says it can't be used that way. But it wasn't, believe me; it
was used in exactly the opposite way. Automation was designed through
the state system to demean and degrade people-to de-skill workers and increase managerial control. And again, that had nothing to do with the market, and it had nothing to do with the nature of the technology: it had to do
with straight power interests. So the kind of automation that was developed
in places like the M.I.T. Engineering Department was very carefully
designed so that it would create interchangeable workers and enhance
managerial control-and that was not for economic reasons.51 I mean, study
after study, including by management firms like Arthur D. Little and so on,
show that managers have selected automation even when it cuts back on
profits-just because it gives them more control over their workforce.52
If you're interested, there's been some very interesting work done on this;
the guy who's done the best work is David Noble-for his sins he was

260

Understanding Power

denied tenure at M.I.T., and now he's teaching in Canada. He wrote a book
called Forces of Production, which is a pretty specialized technical analysis
mainly of the development of numerical control of machinery, but he's also
got a good popular book out, called Progress Without People: In Defense
of Luddism. Unfortunately, this is the kind of book that's published like in
Katmandu or something-it's published by a very small anarchist press in
Chicago. But it's very interesting, didn't make him too popular in the Faculty Club and so on.53
One of the things he discusses there is Luddism [a movement of English
workers who wrecked industrial machines, which began in 1811]. See, the
Luddites are always accused of having wanted to destroy machinery, but it's
been known in scholarship for a long time that that's not truewhat they
really wanted to do was to prevent themselves from being de-skilled, and
Noble talks about this in his book. The Luddites had nothing against
machinery itself, they just didn't want it to destroy them, they wanted it to
be developed in such a way that it would enhance their skills and their
power, and not degrade and destroy them-which of course makes perfect
sense. And that sentiment runs right throughout the working-class
movements of the nineteenth century, actually-and you can even see it
today.
Well, if economics were like a real field, these are the kinds of things
they would be studying. None of it is very complicated-like, everybody
knows why cotton was cheap, for instance: everybody who went to
elementary school knows why cotton was cheap, and if it hadn't been for
cheap cotton, there wouldn't have been an industrial revolution. It's not
hard. But I'd be very surprised if anybody teaches this stuff in economics
courses in the United States.
I mean, sure, there are some market forces operating-but the reality is,
they're pretty much off around the edges. And when people talk about the
progress of automation and free-market "trade forces" inevitably kicking all
these people out of work and driving the whole world towards kind of a
Third World-type polarization of wealth-I mean, that's true if you take a
narrow enough perspective on it. But if you look into the factors that made
things the way they are, it doesn't even come close to being true, it's not
even remotely in touch with reality. But when you're studying economics in
the ideological institutions, that's all just irrelevant and you're not supposed
to ask questions like these: you have all the information right in front of
you, but these are simply not matters that it is proper to spend time talking
about.
A Revolutionary Change in Moral Values
MAN: Noam, given an intellectual culture like the one you've been describing-can you find any "honest" intellectuals in the U.S.?

Chapter Seven

261

You can find them, but like I say, usually they're not inside the institutions-and that's for a very good reason: there is no reason why institutions
of power and domination should tolerate or encourage people who try to
undermine them. That would be completely dysfunctional. So typically
you're going to find major efforts made to marginalize the honest and serious intellectuals, the people who are committed to what I would call Enlightenment values-values of truth, and freedom, and liberty, and justice.
And those efforts will to a large extent succeed.
MAN: Who are those people? I mean, you make the whole situation look
very bleak-who would you say are the intellectuals that are going about
things in the right way?
Well, very often they're the people who have done things to make a real
change in the world. Take the S.N.C.C. [Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee] activists, for example-they were serious intellectuals, and
they made a big change. Or take the people in the 1960s who did the work l that's led
to so many of the improvements we've seen in the country over the last twenty yearsand "work" didn't just mean running around the' streets waving signs, you know, it
also meant thinking about things, and figuring out what the problems were, and trying
to teach people about them and convince them. Despite what you always hear, that
was not elite intel- . lectuals: the liberal intellectual community in the United States
was always strongly opposed to the people who protested the American aggression in
Indochina on principled grounds, they were not the ones assisting the popular
movements. Well, those people were serious intellectuals, in my view.
So you see, there is sort of an "honest" left intelligentsia, if you likemeaning intellectuals who are not serving power as either a Red Bureaucracy, or as state-capitalist commissar-equivalents. It's just that most of the
time they're outside the institutions-and for almost trivial reasons: you're not
going to find a militant labor activist as Chairman of the Board of General
Electric, right? Yeah, how could there be? But there are people all over the
place who are honest and committed, and are thinking about the world, and
trying to change it-many more today than there were thirty years ago, in
fact.
I mean, it's standardly claimed that there's less of a left intelligentsia
around today in the United States than there was in the Fifties and Sixtiesbut I don't believe a word of it. I think the opposite is true, actually. Just
take a look at the people who they're calling the big thinkers of the 1950s:
who were they? They were intelligent people, like Edmund Wilson's an intelligent person-but left intellectual? Or Mary McCarthy: yeah, smart
person, wrote some nice novels-but not a left intellectual. In fact, what you
have now is much more serious activists all over the place, people who are
thinking carefully about important questions, and who understand a lot.

262

Understanding Power

I travel around all the time giving talks, and throughout the 1980s I was
amazed to go to places and see it. Take the Central America solidarity
movement, which was a pretty dramatic development-I don't think there's
ever been anything like it in history, in fact. I'd go to a church in Kansas, or
some town in Montana or Wyoming or something, Anchorage, Alaska, and
find people there who know more about Latin America certainly than the
C.I.A., which isn't very hard actually, but more than people in the academic
departments of universities. They're people who've thought about it, and
who've understood things, and brought a lot of intelligence to the issues-I
can't even tell you their names, there are too many of them.
Also, I'm not even sure the word "left" is the right word for them: a lot of
them were probably Christian conservatives, but they were very radical
people in my view, and intellectuals who understood, and who did a lot.
They created a popular movement which not only protested U.S. atrocities,
but actually engaged themselves in the lives of the victims-they took a
much more courageous stand than was ever done in the 1960s. I mean, the
popular resistance that took place in the Sixties was important-but there
was nobody back then who even dreamt of going to a Vietnamese village
and living there, because maybe a white face would limit the capacity of the
marauders to kill and destroy. That wasn't even an idea in your head. In
fact, nobody even went to try to report the war from the side of the victimsthat was unheard of. But in the 1980s it was common: plenty of people did
it-in fact, people who were coming out of religious groups like Witness for
Peace were doing that by the thousands and tens of thousands. And the
people who were doing that are serious left intellectuals, in my view.54
Remember, what will be labeled "left" in the general culture and given
publicity is going to be something that's ugly enough so that people can be
rallied to oppose it. So books are coming out now about "left intellectuals"
in France who were Stalinists-and look at the awful things they did. Okay,
that kind of "left intelligentsia" is allowed to have publicity and prominence, in fact the elite culture will give them as much prominence as it can.
Or people will say "the left" is things like the Spartacist League, or the Socialist Workers Party or something-little sectlets, the kinds of groups that
anybody who's been involved in movement activities knows are the people
who hang around your offices and your talks trying to see if they can disrupt things. That's not the left, that's parasites that undermine the left-but to
show how lousy the left is, the elite press will say "Oh, the Spartacist
League doesn't have a lot of members": yeah, big excitement.55 On the other
hand, the real left they don't talk about-like they don't talk about the
thousands and thousands of people involved in this, that and the other cause
doing serious work.
So if by "left" you mean people who are struggling for peace, and
justice, and freedom, and human rights, and for social change, and
elimination of authority structures, whether in personal life or in the
institutions-if that's

Chapter Seven

263

what the left is, there are more of them around than I can remember in my
lifetime, at least. A lot more.
MAN: There really has been a big change in the culture.
Yes. If you take almost any area you can think of in life, whether it's
race, or sex, or military intervention, the environment-these are all things
that didn't even exist in the 1950s, people didn't even think they were
issues, you just submitted. And people don't anymore. I mean, if I just look
at pictures from the early Sixties, I can hardly believe how disciplined
everything was, how deep the authority structures were-even just in
personal relations, and in the way you looked and talked when you went out
with your friends. Younger people may not always realize it, but life's a lot
easier than it was forty years ago: there's been a big change, there are a lot
of successes to point to.
Look, a lot of this stuff got started over the Vietnam War. Well, in terms
of official ideology, all of us who were opposed to the war just lost, flat out:
within the mainstream institutions, the only question today is, have the
Vietnamese done enough to compensate us for the crimes that they committed against us? That's the only question you're allowed to discuss if you
want to be a part of the educated culture in the United States. So George
Bush can get up and say, "The Vietnamese should understand that we bear
them no permanent grudge, we're not going to make them pay for everything they did to us; if they finally corne clean, you know, devote their
entire lives and every last resource they have to searching for the remains of
one of those people they viciously blew out of the sky, then maybe we'll
allow them entry into the civilized world"-and there won't be a single
editorial writer or columnist who either falls on the floor laughing, or else
says, "This guy is worse than the Nazis." Because that's the way they all
are: the only issue is, will we forgive them for the crimes that they
committed against US?56 I mean, among the educated sector of the
population in the U.S., there is overwhelming opposition to the war-but it's
only on what are called "pragmatic" grounds: namely, we couldn't get away
with it. So:
"We tried, we made blundering efforts to do good, but it was a mistake."
Well, at that level, we've just lost the entire discussion.
On the other hand, let's go to the general population: to this day, after
twenty-five years of this endless, unremitting propaganda to which no response is ever tolerated, 66 percent of the American population still disagrees with the elite culture-that tells you there's been a victory at another
level. I mean, if two-thirds of the population still says in polls, after all of
this brainwashing, that the war was "fundamentally wrong and immoral,"
not "a mistake," well, something got through. And remember, everybody
who's choosing that answer is choosing it all by themselves-because that is
not what they hear in the mainstream culture, certainly not from educated
people.57

264

Understanding Power

And the thing we have to keep in mind is, the people in power know it:
they might not want us to know it, but they know it. In fact, it's even clear
from their own documents that they know it. For example, a very important
early Bush administration planning document on Third World intervention
was leaked to the press and published on the day of the ground attack in the
Gulf War-by Maureen Dowd, incidentally, who's basically a gossip
columnist for the New York Times. It was an inter-agency study on the
general world situation, prepared by the C.I.A. and the Pentagon and others
during an early stage of the Bush administration, well before the Gulf War.
And it had a section on U.S. military intervention, and what they said was:
in the case of confrontations with "much weaker enemies"meaning anybody
we're willing to fight-we must not only defeat them, but we must defeat
them "decisively and rapidly," because anything else will "undercut
political support," which is understood to be extremely thin.58
See, their belief is, maybe we can frighten the domestic population and
get them to huddle under the flag for a couple days, but unless we get the
intervention over with quickly, it's hopeless-people are going to start to rise
up and pressure us to stop it. These people recognize that there can't be
classical interventions anymore-you know, u.S. soldiers slogging it out in
Vietnam for years and years-it has to be either clandestine warfare, as in
Peru now, where not one American in ten thousand knows there are U.S.
troops, or the Panama/Iraq game, with enormous propaganda about the
enemy ready to destroy us, and then a quick victory without any fighting.
59
Well, that's just a radical difference from the Kennedy period-and that
difference reflects major changes in the culture. Powerful people here understand that they do not have the option of carrying out foreign interventions anymore, unless they carry out decisive, rapid victories over totally
defenseless enemies, after having first gone to great lengths to demonize
them. They certainly recognize that-and that's a tremendous victory for the
left.
And anybody who's my age or even a little bit younger must also realize
that it's a very different country today-and a much more civilized one. Just
look at the issue of the rights of indigenous peoples. When I was a kid, I
considered myself a radical-anarchist-this that and the other thing-but I was
playing "Cowboys and Indians" with my friends: you know, shoot the
Indians. That's like playing "Aryans and Jews" in Germany-you go out and
try to kill the Jews. Well, that lasted for a very long time in the United
States, and nobody even noticed anything curious about it.
I mean, just to tell you another story: I live in Lexington, a mainly uppermiddle-class professional town near Boston, which is very liberal, everybody votes for the Democrats, they all give to the right causes, and so on.
Well, in 1969-the year's interesting-one of my kids was in fourth grade, and
she had a Social Studies textbook about the early history of New England,
called Exploring New England; the book was centered on a boy named
Robert, who was being shown the glories of colonial New England

Chapter Seven

265

by some older man or something. Well, one day I decided to poke through
it, because I was curious about how the authors were going to deal with the
colonists' extermination of the native peoples here. So I turned to the point
in the book where they got to the first really major act of genocide in New
England, the Pequot Massacre of 1637-when the colonists murdered the
Pequot tribe. And to my surprise, it was described quite accurately: the
colonists went into the village and slaughtered all the men, women and children, burned everything down, burned out all the Pequots' crops. Then I got
to the bottom line. The bottom line had this boy, Robert, who's being told
all of these things, say: "I wish I were a man and had been there." In other
words, it was a positive presentation. That was in 1969, right after the My
Lai massacre was exposed.6o
That would be inconceivable today-because there have been very important changes in the culture, and a real increase in civilization. And those
changes are largely the result of a lot of very significant activism and
organizing over the last couple decades, by people that I would refer to as
"honest intellectuals."
In fact, I think all of this screaming about "Political Correctness" that we
hear these days in the elite culture is basically just a tantrum over the fact
that it has been impossible to crush all of the dissidence and the activism
and the concern that's developed in the general population in the last thirty
years. I mean, it's not that some of these "P.c." things they point out aren't
true-yeah, sure, some of them are true. But the real problem is that the huge
right-wing effort to retake control of the ideological system didn't work-and
since their mentality is basically totalitarian, any break in their control is
considered a huge tragedy: 98 percent control isn't enough, you have to
have 100 percent control; these are totalitarian strains. But they couldn't get
it, especially among the general population. They have not been able to beat
back all of the gains of the popular movements since the 1960s, which
simply led to a lot of concern about sexism, and racism, and environmental
issues, respect for other cultures, and all this other bad stuff. And it's led to
real hysteria among elites, so you get this whole P.c. comedy.
I mean, right now the universities are all flooded with Olin Professorships of Free Enterprise [endowed by the conservative Olin Foundation],
there are glossy right-wing magazines handed out free to every studentand
these are not just right-wing, but crazy right-wing. Meanwhile, everybody's
screaming about how the left has taken over. And that's all just out of
hysteria that they haven't gotten back total control-in fact, they've probably
lost most of the population by now. And there's no reason to think that
those changes have ended-I think there's every reason to think that they
could go a lot further, and ultimately lead to changes in the institutions.
Again, people just have to remember: there is nothing in the mainstream
culture that is ever going to tell you you've succeeded-they're always going
to tell you you've failed. I mean, the official view of the Sixties is that

266

Understanding Power

it was a bunch of crazies running around burning down the universities and
making noise, because they were hysterics, or because they were afraid to
go to Vietnam or something-that's the official story, and that's what people
always hear from the intellectual culture. They may know from their own
lives and experience that that's not what really happened, but they never
hear anybody saying it: that's not the message the system is always pouring
into you through television, and radio, and newspapers, and books, and
histories, and so on and so forth. It's beating into your head another storythat you failed, and that you should have failed, because you were just a
bunch of crazies.
And of course, it's natural that the official culture would take that view: it
does not want people to understand that you can make changes, that's the
last thing it wants people to understand. So if there have been changes, it's
because "We the elites are so great that we carried through the changes."
When they bow to pressures, they're going to present that as their benevolence. Like, "We ended slavery because we were such great moral figures
that we decided we didn't like slavery" -but the cause is gone, the slave revolts and the Abolitionist movement are gone.
And we've seen that on a not-so-trivial scale in the last thirty years with
regard to the Sixties movements. There's been something close to a revolutionary change in moral values and cultural level in the general population,
but since that change has taken place without any lasting institutional effects, the intellectual culture can just keep pounding home its moral: "You
guys are worthless, you can't do anything-why don't you just shut up and go
home." That's what they're always going to tell us, and we should try to
remember that.

8

Popular Struggle
Based on discussions in Massachusetts, Maryland, Ontario,
California, and Wyoming in 1989 and between 1993 and 1996.

Discovering New Forms of Oppression
MAN: Dr. Chomsky, some of your examples just reemphasize for me how
power is not with popular opinion. I'm wondering, what do you think should
happen if power ever gets back into popular hands?
Well, it wouldn't be "back," because it never was there. But I think what
we want to do is to extend the domains of popular power in as many areas as
possible. In fact, a large part of human history is just that: a struggle to
extend the domains of popular power and to break down centers of concentrated power.
Take the American Revolution, for example. There was kind of an ideological structure behind it, and that ideological structure was in part libertarian. So if you really took the rhetoric seriously-and to some extent the
eighteenth-century jeffersonians did, it wasn't nothing-what you wanted to
do was to break down concentrations of power and to create a society of
essentially equal participants. Now of course, their sense of "equal participants" included only a very small part of the population: white male property-owners. Today we would call that a reversion to Nazism, and rightly so.
I mean, suppose some Third World country came out saying that a part of
the population is only three-fifths human-that's in the U.S. Constitution, in
fact.1 That would be unacceptable.
So the American Constitution was basically for white male propertyowners, because they're the only ones who are real people-but the idea was
supposed to be that they're more or less equal, and therefore you want to
break down the concentrations of power that are oppressing them. Well, in
those days that meant Church power, state power, the feudal system, and so
on-and what you were supposed to get was this egalitarian society for "the
People," equals white male property-owners.
267

268

Understanding Power

Well, it didn't work out that way, even for the white male property
owners, but that was the picture behind it. And to some extent it was
achieved-some forms of centralized power were in fact dissolved. And the
course of American history since then has just gone on from there. In the
nineteenth century, concentrated power began to be located in corporationsthat's another center of power that now has to be dissolved, and if you're an
eighteenth-century-style libertarian, that's what your main critique will be
of today.
But it seems to me that this is a process which goes on forever-it's not
something that you ever finish with. I mean, my own suspicion is that with
any victory that's won, we will then discover that there's some other form of
authority and repression we didn't even notice before, and we'll try to go
after that one.
And certainly there is real progress you can point to. So while from the
point of view of Jeffersonian libertarians in the eighteenth century, there
was no deviation from democracy and freedom if rights were limited to
white male property-owners, nobody except some Neanderthal would accept that view today. Well, that's progress, that's cultural and social
progress. And that progress was achieved through struggle: it didn't happen
because somebody sat around and talked about it, it happened through the
struggles of the Abolitionists, and the women's movement, and the labor
movement, and others.
Freedom of Speech
MAN: But don't we need to do something to reverse the trend of revolutions
falling short throughout history-don't we have to change the psychology of
human beings before a really libertarian revolution would succeed?
Well, we're not going to change people's psychology-that's a matter for
revolution, that's not just going to happen. But I don't think the failure of
revolutions reflects so much the psychology of human beings as it reflects
the realities of power. Now, in general I think it's true that popular revolutions fail, and one or another elite grouping takes over afterwards. But popular revolutions also succeed-we're no longer living in the Middle Ages,
after all.
Take something like freedom of speech. That's a very important right,
but it has only very recently been achieved. Freedom of speech is an interesting case, actually, where popular struggles over hundreds of years have
finally managed to expand a domain of freedom to the point where it's
pretty good, in fact-in the United States, the best in the world. But it didn't
just happen: it happened through the struggles of the labor movement, and
the Civil Rights Movement, and the women's movement, and everything

Chapter Eight

269

else. It's the popular movements which expanded the domain of freedom of
speech until it began to be meaningful-if those popular movements hadn't
taken place, we'd still be where we were, say, in 1920, when there wasn't
even a theoretical right of freedom of speech. The history of this is remarkable; it's not very well known.
Take the Supreme Court: as many free speech cases came to the United
States Supreme Court from 1959 to 1974 as in the entire preceding history
of the Court-it was only then that freedom of speech was being won.2 I
mean, there had been important advances towards it through the struggles
of the labor movement, which had expanded it to include the rights of picketing and labor organizing, but it wasn't until around the late 1950s that the
right of freedom of speech really began to be claimed by popular movements-and because of that it found its way into the courts, and the courts
began passing decisions. It wasn't until 1964 that the Supreme Court struck
down the 1798 Sedition Act [which forbade spoken or written criticism of
the government, Congress, or the President]-that's very recent history.
MAN: But were there ever any prosecutions under the sedition laws?
Oh sure, plenty of prosecutions. 3 After the First World War, for
example, Eugene Debs [Socialist Party and labor leader] was put in jail for
ten years for making a pacifist speech; he was prosecuted under the 1917
Espionage Act, which was another sedition law. That was a Presidential
candidate--went to jail for ten years for making a speech.4 Or take the Smith
Act of 1940, for example: people went to jail under the Smith Act. That
made it illegal to join a group which advocated--and didn't do anything
about--changing the social order.5 And all of these prosecutions were
upheld by the Supreme Court, remember: they were held to be consistent
with the Constitution.6
In fact, if you look at some of the things that are called victories for freedom of speech, you find that they weren't that at all. Take the famous "clear
and present danger" criterion to justify repressing speech. That was from a
decision by Holmes [Supreme Court Justice] in 1919, one of Holmes's first
big speech decisions-it was Schenck vs. United States, for a long time considered one of the big victories for civil liberties. Here's the case.
Schenck was a Jewish socialist activist who put out a pamphlet in which
he criticized the draft as illegal. He gave constitutional arguments, and he
urged people to oppose the draft by legal means: try to oppose the draft in
the courts, that's what his pamphlet said-it probably went out to twenty
people or something. He was brought to court and condemned for sedition:
assaulting the state with words. It went up to the Supreme Court, and this
was just at the point when Holmes and Brandeis were beginning to make a
crack in the authoritarian tradition. Holmes wrote the decision for a unanimous court, in which he upheld the conviction-that's something that people
forget, he upheld Schenck's conviction-and he put forth this "clear and

270

Understanding Power

present danger" criterion: you can be punished if you falsely cry "Fire!" in a
crowded theater. Holmes said: you can control freedom of speech when
there is a clear and present danger, and when Schenck put out his document
saying people should oppose the draft by legal means, that was a clear and
present danger. That's the great victory for civil liberties. 7
And so it goes. It wasn't until 1964 that laws punishing seditious libel
were struck down. The case is interesting and instructive-it was a Civil
Rights Movement case, that's what did it; it was New York Times vs. Sullivan. What happened was, the New York Times was sued by the State of Alabama for running an ad in support of Martin Luther King and the Civil
Rights Movement, which accused the sheriff of Montgomery of doing a
bunch of rotten things to civil rights activists.
MAN: This is the big libel law case?
Yes, but it was seditious libel-because it was criticism of a government
official that was being punished. See, whether you have seditious libel is
sort of at the core of whether it's a free society or not: if you're not allowed
to criticize the government, if you can be punished for assaulting the government with words, even if that's in the background somewhere, the society is not really free. And truth is no defense to this kind of libel charge,
keep in mind-in fact, traditionally truth makes the crime worse, because if
what you're saying is true, then the undermining of state authority is even
worse.
So this elected sheriff in Alabama sued the New York Times saying they
had defamed him: the idea was that by publishing this ad, the Times had
undermined his authority as an agent of the state. Well, it went up to the
Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court-I think it was Brennan who wrote
the opinion-for the first time said that seditious libel is unacceptable. In
fact, they referred to the 1798 Sedition Act, which had never been struck
down by the Court, and said this is inconsistent with the First Amendment. 8
That's the first case in which the courts struck down seditious libel.
If you want a history of this, the major Establishment legal history of
freedom of speech is a book by a legal scholar named Harry Kalven, called
A Worthy Tradition. The book's very good, except for the title-it's actually
an unworthy tradition that he's describing. And he points out, I'm basically
quoting him, that 1964 was the first time the United States met the minimal
condition for a democratic society: you can't assault the state with words.9
It wasn't until 1969 that the Supreme Court then rejected the "clear and
present danger" test-which also is awful. "Clear and present danger"
shouldn't be a criterion for punishing speech. The proper criterion, if there's
any, should be contribution to a crime--commission of, or maybe even
incitement to, an actual criminal act. That's a plausible criterion. And the
Supreme Court only reached that criterion in 1969 [in the case
Brandenburg

Chapter Eight

271

vs. Ohio].10 So you know, freedom of speech is a very recent innovation in
the United States-and the United States is unique: it doesn't exist anywhere
else in the world.
For example, you might have read that in Canada they kept Salman
Rushdie's book [The Satanic Verses] out of the country for a couple weeks
while they were trying to figure out if it conflicted with a Canadian law--it's
referred to as an "anti-hate" law or something. That law makes two things a
crime. First, it makes it a crime to distribute "false news." That's something
that goes back to 1275, I looked it up-in 1275 the first "false news" law was
established in England, making it a crime to produce "false news." What
that means is, the state determines what's true, and if you say anything that's
not what the state says is true, that's "false news" and you go to jail. That's
in Canada. The second thing the law prohibits is statements which are
"harmful to the public interest." That provision was intended to stop people
like Holocaust deniers, guys who say there were no gas chambers and so
on, because they're harmful to the public interest-so therefore the state can
repress them. And when Canadian officials stopped the Rushdie book, it
was under that provision: they had to check it out to see if it was inflaming
hatred of Muslims or something like that.
Well, everybody here screamed about it at the time of the Rushdie casebut nobody here raised a peep when that law was actually applied a few
years ago to put a guy in jail for fifteen months.
MAN: In Canada?
In Toronto. This is in fact the guy who the law was aimed at: he's some
kind of neo-Nazi who wrote a pamphlet, which he privately distributed, in
which he said that there were no gas chambers, or there was no Holocaust,
or one thing or another-and he was brought to court under this very same
law that kept the Rushdie book out. Ernst Zundel his name is. He was convicted and sentenced by the courts to fifteen months in prison plus a threeyear period in which he is not permitted to talk, publicly or privately, about
anything directly or indirectly related to the Holocaust-meaning he can't
talk with his friends about the Second World War. And there was a move to
deport him, which the Liberal Party in Canada supported.11
Alright, this was reported in the American press. The Boston Globe had
an editorial in which they praised the jury for having the courage, finally, to
shut these guys up-by enforcing a law that gives the state the power to determine truth, and to punish deviation from it.12 When the Globe started
screaming about the Rushdie affair, I sent the editors a copy of that editorial
and asked them if they would like to rethink it; well, I haven't heard anything yet .... And you know, you didn't have Susan Sontag [American
writer] getting up in public and saying, "I am Ernst Zundel," all this kind of
thing. The point is, you defend freedom of speech when it's speech you like,
and when you're sure there's a half-billion Western Europeans out there be-

272

Understanding Power

tween you and the Ayatollah Khomeini so you can be courageous [the Iranian leader put a $6 million price on Rushdie's head in 1989]. But when you
get to a case where nobody likes what's being said, then somehow defense
of freedom of speech disappears.
Well, you couldn't have a law like that in the United States anymore, but
you can have it in Canada-and American intellectuals basically support it,
like the liberal Boston Globe, the New York Times, the P.E.N. writers [an
organization that promotes free expression for writers] who don't get excited. It's only when it's a case where we like the views being attacked that
you get a big outcry about freedom of speech here.
And other countries are the same as Canada-like in England, there is no
freedom of speech, by law. The police there can go into the B.B.C. [British
Broadcasting Corporation] offices, as they did recently, and rifle through
the files and take out anything they want, and the government can prevent
people from publishing things. 13 In fact, as Alex Cockburn [British!
American journalist] just noted, there's a new law in England called an
"anti-terrorism" law, which makes it illegal to report statements by people
the state regards as terrorists. Well, that includes Sinn Fein representatives
[Northern Irish political party], people who are elected to Parliament in
Britain-you're not allowed to report what they say. Cockburn pointed out
that this law was recently used to block a documentary in which a couple of
eighty-year-old Irish women were being interviewed about things that happened in the 1930s: the television channels were afraid to run it because of
the risk of being prosecuted. So in England, you can't have a couple of Irish
women talking about things that went on in the 1930s, because the state
might not permit it.
In France, where there isn't even a vague tradition of freedom of speech,
the government last year canceled a newspaper of Algerian dissidents in
France on the sole ground that its publication was harmful to French diplomatic relations with Algeria-none of the French intellectuals even raised a
peep; they were all screaming about Salman Rushdie, but not about this. 14
In fact, the same is true wherever you go: the United States is unusual-possibly even unique in the world-in that we actually protect freedom of
speech. But that was only won after long, bitter struggle-it happened because people were fighting about it for centuries. And the same is true of
every other right you can think of.
Negative and Positive Freedoms
WOMAN: I have to say that I'm a little uncomfortable with your kind of
extreme freedom of speech advocacy, though. It just seems to me that until
there's a more equitable distribution of access to free speech, it's going to
be used destructively more often than it's used positively. It makes me
uncomfortable, so I just don't want to jump on your bandwagon.

Chapter Eight

273

Well, let me see what I can say to that. Freedoms are usually distinguished between the "negative" kind and the "positive" kind. "Negative
freedom" means there's no coercive force around that prevents you from
doing something; "positive freedom" is when circumstances are such that
you can actually do it. And those things can be quite different.
Now, freedom of speech is available today in the United States mostly as
a negative freedom-meaning, nobody stops you. But it's not available as a
positive freedom, because as you say, access to the channels of
communication is highly skewed in our society, it's distributed roughly in
accordance with power, which obviously is highly unequal. Okay, what's
the way of overcoming that? One way of overcoming it-which is, say, the
Catharine MacKinnon [feminist legal scholar] way-is to give the people in
power even more power: give the people in power even more power, so
they can use it even more inequitably. In other words, don't change the
power structure, just put through some laws prohibiting speech and let the
power structure enforce them. That means, give more power to the people
who have power, and let them use it the way they feel like using it-that's
exactly what it means. And they'll stop the speech they want to stop.
Alright, that's one way. The other way is to try to change the distribution of
power in the society, but not to attack the freedom of speech.
My own view is that you should save the negative freedoms, defend
strongly the negative freedoms, but then try to make them positive freedoms. If the goal is to achieve positive freedom, it doesn't help to destroy
negative freedom-like, giving the state the power to determine what people
can say does not improve the position of people who are now powerless.
And those are really the only choices you have.
I mean, to attain the negative freedom was a big achievement, I think.
When the Supreme Court struck down the Sedition Act, it didn't grant anybody positive freedom, that's true. But it was a very important victory for
popular movements-because that kind of law strikes right at the core of
protest and dissidence. I don't think you expand those victories by assigning
more power to the state authorities to control speech. And there is no other
way to control it: if speech is controlled, it's controlled by police power.
WOMAN: Acknowledging that, I still have two concerns. One is, don't
we have an obligation to the victims of free speech?
Sure ...
WOMAN: The second is, what about people who are saying speech that
they know to be false, but are hiding behind "free speech" to promulgate
their own interests?
Well, that's what they'll say about you. Look, ultimately the question is,
who gets to make that decision and enforce it? And there is only one inde-

274

Understanding Power

pendent structure that can do that, that's the state, that's state power, government power, the police, you know, the cops, F.B.I. They can make that
decision, nobody else can. So the question is, do you want them to be in a
position to decide what speech is acceptable? That's essentially what it
comes down to. And I would say, no, we don't want them to have any right
to make any decision about what anybody says. And of course, that's going
to mean that a lot of people are going to say things that you think are
rotten, and you're going to say things that a lot of other people think are
rotten.
As to the obligation to the victims, sure-but that's a matter of building up
and extending the positive freedoms. In fact, here's a case where I think the
left is off on really marginal issues. Take the question of pornography: I
mean, undoubtedly women suffer from pornography, but in terms of people
suffering from speech in the world, that's hardly even a speck. People
suffer a lot more from the teaching of free-trade economics in colleges-huge numbers of people in the Third World are dying because of the stuff
that's taught in American economics departments, I'm talking about tens of
millions. That's harm. Should we therefore pass a law that says that the
government ought to decide what you teach in economics departments?
Absolutely not, then it would just get worse. They'd force everybody to
teach this stuff.
MAN: What about things like shouting "Fire!" in a movie theater, or commanding people to assault somebody? Don't you think there should be a
limit there?
Well, the people who attack free speech rights typically say, "Look,
speech is an act"-which is true, speech is an act. But therefore it ought to be
treated like other acts. I mean, let's agree, speech is an act, it certainly is.
But then let's treat it like any other act. For example, if you throw a bomb
into a crowded theater, yeah, that's a crime, somebody ought to stop you.
And if you participate in the act of somebody else throwing one, even if
your participation is with words, somebody also ought to stop you. Like, if
you and I go into a grocery store with the intent to rob it, and you have a
gun, and I'm your boss, and I say "Fire!" and you kill the owner, that's
speech. But it shouldn't be protected speech, in my opinion-because that
statement is participation in a criminal act.
MAN: What about things like sexual harassment?
That's a different story. See, there are conflicting rights. Rights aren't an
axiom system [i.e. where there are no contradictions], and if you look
closely at them, they often conflict-so you just have to make judgments
between them in those cases. And like freedom of speech, another right that
people have is to work without getting harassed. So I think laws against

Chapter Eight

275

sexual harassment in the workplace are perfectly reasonable, because they
follow from a reasonable principle-namely, you should be able to work
without harassment, period. Sexual or any other kind. On the other hand,
sexual harassment in the streets is another story, and I think it has to be
treated differently.
Look, in the real free speech discussions, there is nobody who's an absolutist on free speech. People may pretend to be, but they're not. Like, I've
never heard of anybody who says that you have a right to come into my
house and put up a Nazi poster on the wall. Well, okay, blocking you from
doing that is an infringement on your freedom of speech, but it's also a protection of my right to privacy. And those rights sometimes conflict, because
rights do conflict, so therefore we just have to make judgments between
them-and those judgments are often not easy to make. But in general, I
think we should be extremely wary about placing the power to make those
determinations in the hands of authorities, who are going to respond to the
distribution of power in the society as they carry them out.
MAN: In my university, we had an architecture professor who in the course
of his class was telling people that if they wanted to buy a camera they
should bring a Jew with them, all sorts of racist things like that. People
were wondering if they should censor him or not.
Yeah, it's a hard question. For instance, I was an undergraduate right
after the Second World War, and I happened to have a German class taught
by a guy who was a flat outright Nazi-he didn't even hide it. There were a
lot of war veterans around in those days, so guys were ready to kill him and
stuff, because these things were very live in people's minds. But should the
university have fired him? I didn't think so. I think it's dangerous to impose
such constraints on what people are allowed to say. There are other ways of
dealing with it.
MAN: You might say that someone else in the classroom has a right not to
hear it, though.
Yes, but see, if a student gets up and denounces him, the student has a
right to do that, and then if the student is punished you've got a straight
case-because the guy in authority has no right to do anything except sit and
listen. But should you stop the teacher from talking about things? I think
that's tricky.
Even there, though, it's not totally straightforward. Like, there's a contractual arrangement when you go to a class: namely, you want to study
chemistry or whatever it is, that's why you're there, and if the teacher starts
talking about fundamentalist religion or something, you have a right to say,
"He shouldn't be paid, get rid of him, because I came here to study chemistry, that was our common agreement, and he violated that agreement-so

276

Understanding Power

throw him out." On the other hand, if the teacher just says things you don't
like, that's different.
Again, rights aren't an axiom system, so there are conflicts between
them, and people just have to make their own judgments. But my own judgment, at least, tends to be that a lot of leeway ought to be allowed. Often
the cases are quite hard, though-because our moral codes simply aren't clear
enough to give answers in a lot of situations, and people come up with
different ones.
MAN: You think there's some ambiguity with sexual harassment, then?
Oh yeah, a fair amount of ambiguity. For example, sexual harassment by
words in the streets-like if somebody makes a nasty crack about some
woman's dress or something-I don't think they should be put in jail.
WOMAN: What about violence on television? Does that also conflict with
other rights?
Violence on television raises quite hard questions, I think. But I don't
know: if you look at the literature on whether T.V. violence or pornography
cause a demonstrable harm-you know, result in violence in the real world-it
doesn't show anything convincing. So maybe it's too hard to study or
something like that, but there are almost no probative results that I know of
one way or the other: the facts just aren't there. There's psychic harm, that's
undoubtedly true, but that you can't measure. As for the kinds of things you
can measure, like increase in acts of violence-I mean, you probably get
more acts of violence coming after things like sports events; not huge
amounts more, but there's a notable increase in domestic violence, say, after
things like the Superbowl.15
Cyberspace and Activism
WOMAN: Mr. Chomsky, on a very different note, I'd like to talk a bit about
some of the recent computer technologies like the Internet, and e-mail, and
the World Wide Web and so on, and how significant an impact you think
they are going to have on political activism and organizing in the future.
Do you see the Internet as more of a force for democracy, or a force for
diverting the population from engaging themselves politically in the world?
Well, my feeling is that the Internet is pretty much the same sort of phenomenon as radio and television were-or for that matter, as automation.
Look, in most cases technology isn't predisposed to help people or harm

Chapter Eight

277

people-there's very rarely anything inherent in it which requires that either
of those things be the case, it just depends on who gets control of it.
So take radio, for example. You might ask why popular movements in
the United States have to look to small community-controlled radio stations
to get programming which addresses their interests and needs and goals,
why doesn't any mainstream radio do that? Well, the reason is, the United
States just diverged from the rest of the world on this back around the late
1920s and early Thirties, when radio was first coming into existence.
See, radio has a limited frequency band, which necessarily has to be rationed-so the question is, how is that rationing going to be done? Well, in
every major country in the world-and maybe in every country except the
United States-radio was turned into a public forum to some degree, meaning it's as democratic as the country is. Like, in Russia, it's not democratic,
in Great Britain, it's as democratic as England is-but somehow it's still in
the public domain. The United States went the other way: here radio was
privatized, it was put into private hands-and furthermore, that was called a
victory for democracy here.16 So now if you want radio that's not under
corporate control in the United States, you have to go to small local community radio stations-which are very important, but of course are on the
margins, and have only extremely limited resources.
Or take television: when television came along in the 1940s, the same
thing happened in the United States. In fact, in the case of television, there
wasn't even a battle about it-it was just completely handed over to private
power at once.17
Well, I think the Internet is going to be the same basic story: if it's put in
the hands of private power, like T.V. and radio were, then we know exactly
how it's going to turn out. In fact, they've been telling us about it constantly. So I remember an article in the Wall Street Journal about the wonders of all the new technology, and they described the great things that can
be done because it's "interactive"-you know, you don't just have to be
passive anymore, now you can really do things when you're sitting there in
front of the tube. Well, they described how it would work, and they gave
two examples, one for women and the other for men.
For women, it's going to be an incredible home-shopping thing: like,
you're sitting there watching some model, and she shows you some ridiculous object, and you figure, "Well, I'd better have that or my kid won't grow
up properly"-and now it's interactive, you know, so you can just push a
button and they'll send it right over to your house. That's the interaction for
women. For men, the example they gave was of watching the Superbowl,
which every red-blooded male is supposed to do. Well, today it's passive:
you just sit there and watch the gladiators fighting. But with the new
technology, it's going to be interactive. So what they suggest is, while the
team's in its huddle getting instructions from the coach about the next play,
everyone in the audience-you know, the entire male population

278

Understanding Power

that's alive-is going to be asked to make their own decision about it: like,
should it be a pass, or a run, or a kick or something. And then after the play
is run (which is going on completely independently of this, of course)
they'll flash on the screen what people thought the coach should have donethat's going to be the interaction for men.
And that's probably the way it's going to go in general: it'll be used as
another technique for control and manipulation, and for keeping people in
their roles as mindless consumers of things they don't really want. Sure-why should the people who own the society do things any differently?
But of course, none of these technologies have to be used like that-again, it just depends who ends up controlling them. I mean, if the general
public ever ended up controlling them, they could be used quite differently.
For example, these information-processing systems could be used as methods by which working people could come to control their own workplaces
without the need for managers and bosses-so every person in the workplace
could have all the information they need in order to make all the decisions
themselves, in real time, when it counts. Well, in that kind of circumstance,
the same technology would be a highly democratizing device--in fact, it
would help eliminate the core of the whole system of authority and
domination. But obviously it's not just going to develop like that on its
own-people will have to organize and fight to make that sort of thing ever
happen, in fact fight very strenuously for it.
As to the effects of all of this on activism, I think it's a complicated
story.
I think we can be certain that there's a lot of thinking going on about
whether to even allow things like the Internet to exist-because from the
point of view of power, it's just too democratic: it's very hard to control
what's in it, and who can gain access to it. For example, I have a daughter
living in Nicaragua, and during the u.s. contra war in the 1980s it was impossible to telephone or send letters there. The only way I could stay in
contact with her was through the ARPAnet, which is basically a Pentagon
computer system I was able to get access to through M.I.T.-so we were
corresponding thanks to the Pentagon. Well, that's the kind of thing that
happens on the Internet, and a lot of powerful people obviously don't like
that aspect of it.
And they don't like the fact that you can get the text of the G.A.T.T.
[General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade] treaty, and the latest news that
doesn't appear in the U.S. newspapers, and so on-in fact, if you look around on
the Internet, you can find virtually everything I talk about somewhere in there. And on some issues, like say, East Timor, it's also been an
invaluable political organizing tool-because most of the information about
what happened there was simply silenced by the U.S. press for years and
years. Well, those are all bad things from the perspective of private power,
and they surely would like to stop that side of it.
On the other hand, it has a number of other advantages for power. For
one thing, it diverts people, it atomizes people. When you're sitting in front

Chapter Eight

279

of your tube, you're alone. I mean, there's something about human beings
that just makes face-to-face contact very different from banging around on
a computer terminal and getting some noise coming back-that's very impersonal, and it breaks down human relations. Well, that's obviously a good
result from the point of view of people with power-because it's extremely
important to drive human sentiments out of people if you just want them to
be passive and obedient and under control. So if you can eliminate things
like face-to-face contact and direct interaction, and just turn people into
what's caricatured as kind of an M.I.T. nerd-you know, somebody who's
got antennae coming out of his head, and is wired into his computer all the
time-that's a real advantage, because then you've made them more
inhuman, and therefore more controllable.
Another thing I've found is that there's a kind of degraded character to email messages. People are just too casual about them-they send you any halfbaked idea they haven't even thought through yet, whenever the impulse hits
them. And the result is, it ends up being a tremendous burden even to read
everything that comes across, let alone to answer it-so that can easily end up
being all you do with your time. And people do put huge numbers of hours into
it. In fact, there are friends of mine whose quality of work I think is seriously
declining, because of their overwhelming involvement in e-mail interactions.
It's extremely seductive just to sit at the computer screen and bang at it all day.
Furthermore, I think there are still other aspects to it which are very
threatening to popular movements. For instance, one thing I've noticed is that a
lot of activists have been dropping subscriptions to left journals recently. Why?
Because they can get them through the Internet. Now, see, if I was in the C.I.A.
or something, right now I'd be saying, "Look, let's encourage this-it's true it has
the negative effect of allowing people to get more information, but it also has
the positive effect of destroying alternative institutions. So let's let it go onbecause when all these people stop paying their subscriptions to, I don't know,
Z Magazine or something, that is going to destroy those institutions, and that's
going to separate and fragment the left even more, and maybe even destroy it."
Well, I doubt that anybody in the C.I.A. has this much brains, but if they had
enough brains, I think they would just want the whole thing to go on, because
it's probably going to destroy the dissident organizations-and it'll destroy them
because we're so anti-social that we don't even see the point of supporting
popular institutions. Remember, even if you're an activist on the left, what
you've constantly been taught from childhood, and what you've still got
ingrained in your head is: "I'm just out for myself, and therefore if I can get the
information for nothing, why should I help to build an institution?" Well, that's
obviously a very anti-social attitude-but you find it's very hard to break out of:
we've just got it. So there are a number of aspects to these technologies that are
highly dangerous, in my view-and I hope people will soon start to recognize
and resist those aspects of them.

280

Understanding Power
"Free Trade" Agreements

MAN: You mentioned that people with power probably don't like it that the
G.A.T.T. treaty got onto the Internet. It just emphasized for me how these
international trade agreements are being forced on us, and yet nobody
even knows what they're about. I'm wondering what you think of that?
Well, plenty of people know what they're about-there are plenty of
people working for big corporations who know what the G.A.T.T. treaty is
about, for example. But you're right, the general population here doesn't
have the slightest idea about it-I mean, overwhelmingly the general population of the United States hasn't even heard of G.A.T.T., and certainly they
don't know what its likely effects are going to be. [G.A.T.T. was first
established in 1947, but the "Uruguay Round" of negotiations to modify it
concluded in December 1993; the treaty then was signed in April 1994.]
What do I think of that? I think it's ridiculous-grotesque, in fact. Look,
G.A.T.T. is something of major significance. The idea that it's going to be
rammed through Congress on a fast track without public discussion just
shows that anything resembling democracy in the United States has completely collapsed. So whatever one thinks about G.A.T.T., at least it should
be a topic for the general public to become informed about, and to investigate, and to look at, and think about carefully. That much is easy.
If you ask what should happen in that public discussion-well, if that
public discussion ever comes along, I'll be glad to say what I think. And
what I think is in fact mixed. It's like N.A.F.T.A.: I don't know of anyone
who was opposed to a North American trade agreement in principle-the
question was, what kind?18 So before N.A.F.T.A. got passed [in 1993],
mainstream groups like the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment--can't get more centrist than that-eame out with very sharp and intelligent critiques of the Executive version of N.A.F.T.A., the one that
finally went through. And they pointed out that in fact N.A.F.T.A. was
designed to be an investor rights agreement, not a "free trade" agreement-and that it was going to drive the economies of each of the three participating countries [the U.S., Canada and Mexico] down towards a kind of lowwage, low-growth equilibrium; they didn't say it of course, but it'll also be a
high-profit equilibrium. And they suggested very constructive alternatives.
19

Well, those sorts of constructive critiques never even entered the mainstream discussion about N.A.F.T.A. here: all you ever heard in the media
was, "Crazy jingoists don't like Mexican workers."
The same was true of the American labor movement: its proposals were
nothing like what was constantly being denounced in the press with virtually 100 percent uniformity.20 The Labor Advisory Committee, for exam-

Chapter Eight

281

pIe-which by law is required to give its opinion on these things, but was illegally cut out of the discussion--came out with quite a constructive report
on N.A.F.T.A.: it wasn't against an agreement, it was against that agreement. In fact, the story of the Labor Advisory Committee report tells you a
lot about the way that N.A.F.T.A. was passed in the U.S., a lot about American democracy.
Twenty years ago, Congress enacted a Trade Act requiring that before
any trade-related legislation or treaty is passed, there has to be consultation
with a "Labor Advisory Committee" they set up which is based in the
unions, such as they are. That's by law: the Labor Advisory Committee has
to give an analysis and a critique of any American trade-related issue, so
obviously that would include N.A.F.T.A.21 Well, the Labor Advisory Committee was informed by the Clinton White House that their report was due
on September 9th; they were not given an inkling of what was in the treaty
until September 8th-so obviously they couldn't even convene to meet.
Then on top of that, they weren't even given the whole text of the treaty--it's this huge treaty, hundreds and hundreds of pages.
But somehow they did manage to write a response to it anyway, and it
was a very angry response-both because of the utter contempt for democracy revealed by these maneuvers, but also because from the glimmerings
of what they could get out of N.A.F.T.A. when they sort of flipped through
it for a couple of hours, it was obvious that this thing was just going to have
a devastating effect on American labor, and probably also a devastating effect on Mexican labor too, though of course it will be highly beneficial to
American investors, and probably also to Mexican investors.22 It's also certain to have a highly destructive effect on the environment-because its laws
supersede federal and state legislation. So obviously there are really major
issues here, crucially important issues, which in a functioning democracy
would have been the subject of intensive public consideration and debate.
Actually, if you looked closely, even N.A.F.T.A.'s advocates conceded
that it was probably going to harm the majority of the populations of the
three countries. For instance, its advocates in the United States were saying,
"It's really good, it'll only harm semi-skilled workers"-footnote: 70 percent
of the workforce.23 As a matter of fact, after N.A.F.T.A. was safely passed,
the New York Times did their first analysis of its predicted effects in the
New York region: it was a very upbeat article talking about how terrific it
was going to be for corporate lawyers and P.R. firms and so on. And then
there was a footnote there as well. It said, well, everyone can't gain, there'll
also be some losers: "women, blacks, Hispanics, and semi-skilled labor"--in
other words, most of the people of New York.24 But you can't have
everything. And those were the advocates.
In fact, it's kind of striking that about a day or two after N.A.F.T.A. was
passed, the Senate approved the most onerous crime bill in U.S. history [the
Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act], which the House then

282

Understanding Power

made even worse. Now, I don't know if that was just a symbolic coincidence or what-but it makes sense. I mean, N.A.F.T.A. was clearly going to
have the effect of reducing wages for probably three-quarters of the American population, and it's going to make a lot more of the population superfluous from the point of view of profits-so the Crime Bill just will take care
of a lot of them, by throwing them in jail.
Okay, that's N.A.F.T.A.-what about G.A.T.T.? Well, in India, for example, there were hundreds of thousands of people demonstrating in the
streets about some of the G.A.T.T. provisions-which they know about. I
mean, we may be very ignorant about it in the United States, but people in
the Third World know a lot about G.A.T.T.: Indian peasants understand
what's being done to them, even if people here don't, which is why
G.A.T.T. has to be passed virtually at gunpoint in countries like India.25
Well, what are those people so upset about? Here's one thing. One of the
protections codified in the current G.A.T.T. agreements, as in N.A.F.T.A.,
is what's called "intellectual property rights" [i.e. rights to registered trademarks, patented technologies, and copyrights of valuable "information"
products ranging from music to genes]. Intellectual property rights are a
protectionist measure, they have nothing to do with free trade-in fact,
they're the exact opposite of free trade. And they'll do a lot of things, but
two really crucial ones.
First of all, they're going to increase the duration of patents: meaning, if
Merck Pharmaceutical patents some drug, thanks to publicly-subsidized
work in American universities, for example, now they can get a much
longer patent for it under G.A.T.T.-much longer than any of the rich
countries ever accepted during the periods when they were developing,
incidentally. In fact, it's only in very recent years that the rich countries
have even honored patent rights at all-the United States never did when it
was a developing country, for instance. So, point one: patents are being
much extended.
Secondly, the nature of patents is being shifted in character. See, up
until now, patents have been what are called "process patents" -in other
words, if Merck figures out a way to create a drug, the process of making
the drug is patented, but not the drug itself. The G.A.T.T. treaty, like
N.A.F.T.A., shifts that: now it's the product that's patented-meaning the
Indian or Argentine pharmaceutical industries no longer can try to figure
out a smarter way to produce the same drug at half the cost, in order to get
it to their own populations more affordably. Notice that these are not only
highly protectionist measures, but they're a blow against economic
efficiency and technological progress-that just shows you how much "free
trade" really is involved in all of this.
Actually, there are significant historical precedents on product patents,
and I'm sure that they are perfectly well known to the G.A.T.T. designers.
France, for example, once had a chemical industry, but it lost it-most of the
French chemical industry moved to Switzerland, which is why Switzerland
now has such a large chemical industry. The reason? France happened

Chapter Eight

283

to have product patents, which were such a barrier to innovation and technical progress that the French chemical companies just decided to go elsewhere.26 Well, now G.A.T.T. is trying to impose that inefficiency on the
entire world. In fact, India already has been forced to accept it: a little
while ago they did what's called "liberalizing" their pharmaceuticals
industry, meaning they opened it up to foreign penetration. So now drug
prices will shoot sky-high, more children will die, people won't be able to
afford medications they need, and so on.27
Well, these changes in patents are just one part of G.A.T.T.: they're one
piece of a whole attempt that is now being made to ensure that unaccountable transnational corporations will monopolize the technologies of the future. In my opinion, that's grotesque-I don't see any reason to push that
through. Certainly anyone who believes in free trade would be opposed to
these policies: they're a high level of protectionism, which in fact is specifically designed to be contrary to even the narrow definitions of economic efficiency they teach you in the University of Chicago Economics
Department [home of well-known exponents of free-market theory].
G.A.T.T. is going to cut down on technological innovation, it's going to cut
down on economic efficiency-but by some strange accident, it'll also
happen to increase profits, so of course nobody will pick up on any of the
contradictions.
As a matter of fact, it's not even clear that these so-called "free trade"
agreements are going to increase trade at all, in any authentic sense. So
there's a lot of talk in the papers these days about the growth of international trade, which is supposed to show everyone how wonderful the market is. But if you take a look at that international trade, you'll find that it's a
very curious kind of growth: about SO percent of U.S. trade now is internal
to corporations, which means it's about as much "trade" as if you move
something from one shelf of a grocery store to another, it just happens to
cross an international border, so therefore it gets recorded as "trade." And
the figures are comparable for other major countries.28
That means, for example, that if the Ford Motor Company sends some
parts to Mexico to be assembled by super-cheap labor under essentially no
environmental regulations and then they ship it back up to the United States
to add more value to it, that's "trade." But that's not trade at all: those aren't
exports, they didn't even enter the Mexican market-they're centrallymanaged interactions by huge institutions, with a very "visible hand"
pushing them around, and with all kinds of other market distortions
involved that nobody here bothers to study very much but which undoubtedly are severe. And SO percent is not a small amount-that's a lot. I mean, at
the time that N.A.F.T.A. was passed, there was a lot of talk in the press
about U.S. trade with Mexico soaring-but there wasn't talk about the fact
that more than half of U.S. exports to Mexico were internal to corporations.
So in fact, N.A.F.T.A. and G.A.T.T. might really end up reducing tradethey'll probably increase things moving across borders, but that's not the
same as trade: those transfers are not market interactions.

284

Understanding Power

Well, okay, these are complicated matters, and you don't just want to
sloganize about them-but in my opinion, all of these international agreements are part of a general attack on democracy and free markets that we're
seeing in the contemporary period, as banks, investment firms, and
transnational corporations develop new methods to extend their power free
from public scrutiny. And in that context, it's not very surprising that
they're all being rammed through as quickly and secretly as they are. And
whatever you happen to think about the specific treaties that have now been
put into place, there is just no doubt that their consequences for most of the
people in the world are going to be vast.
In fact, these treaties are just one more step in the process that's been accelerating in recent years of differentiating the two main class interests of
the world still further-far more so than before-so that the Third World
wealth-distribution model is being extended everywhere. And while the
proportions of wealth in a rich country like the United States will always
differ significantly from the proportions in a deeply impoverished country
like Brazil, for example (deeply impoverished thanks to the fact that it's
been under the Western heel for centuries), you can certainly see the effects
under way in recent years. I mean, in the United States things probably
aren't going to get to the point where 80 percent of the population is living
like Central Africa and 10 percent is fabulously wealthy. Maybe it'll be 50
percent and 30 percent or something like that, with the rest somewhere in
between-because more people are always going to be needed in the Western societies for things like scientific research and skilled labor, providing
propaganda services, being managers, things like that. But the changes no
doubt are happening, and they will be rapidly accelerated as these accords
are implemented.
Defense Department Funding and "Clean Money"
WOMAN: Noam, just to go back to freedom of thought for a second-I'm
curious what your feeling is about the Defense Department funding so
many of our scientists today. Do you see that as a problem in terms of freedom of research and freedom of inquiry? And does it make you feel at all
uncomfortable personally to be working at M.I.T.?
To tell you the honest truth, I've always thought that's kind of a secondary issue. For instance, in the late 1960s, M.IT. was about 80 percent
funded by the Defense Department-it's less than that today, because of
things like cancer research money. But what did that mean? Was M.IT. different from, say, Harvard, which wasn't so much funded by the Defense
Department? Well, about the only major differences between them were
that M.IT. was a little bit more open to radical ideas, and there was more
political activism and fewer ideological controls. That's about it, as far as I
could see.

Chapter Eight

285

Now, there was once a time when I was being funded by the Air Force
myself-to do exactly the same sort of thing that I'm doing now in my scientific work. Right now I'm not, so if you asked me whether I'm funded by
the Defense Department, I could in some narrow sense say no. But the fact
of the matter is, I am funded by the Defense Department, whether I have a
contract with them or not-because if the Defense Department weren't
funding the Electrical Engineering Department, which M.IT. needs, the Institute would not be able to fund my department. I mean, if you're teaching
music at M.IT. you're being funded by the Defense Department, because if
somebody they really cared about weren't being funded by the Defense Department, they wouldn't have anything left to pay you to teach music. So in
part the thing is kind of like a bookkeeping device.
As for its influence on what's done, that's very small: the Defense Department doesn't give a damn what you do most of the time-they just want
to fund it, because they want to have a bigger bureaucracy or something
like that. So there's very little reporting back by the scientists, they don't
pay much attention to you, they don't care whether you did what you said
you'd do or something else, and so on. In fact, back in the Sixties, there was
a guy in my lab who was working on translating Humboldt [a Prussian
philosopher]-he was being funded by the Office of Naval Research, they
didn't care.
As far as the moral issue goes-I mean, it's not as if there's some clean
money somewhere. If you're in a university, you're on dirty money-you're
on money which is coming from people who are working somewhere, and
whose money is being taken away, and is going to support things like universities. Now, there are a lot of ways in which that money can be taken
away from those working people and get fed into the universities. One way
is by diverting it through taxes and government bureaucracies. Another way
is by channeling it through profits-like, some rich benefactor gives it as a
gift to the university, meaning he stole it from his workers. And there are
all sorts of other ways in which it happens too. But it all comes down to the
same point: if you're at a university, you're there because there is a social
structure which commits a certain amount of "surplus product," if you want
to use a Marxist term, to funding people sitting around in universities.
Now, I don't see a whole lot of difference myself as to whether that
money works its way through the Department of Defense or through some
other mechanism-that's why I've never made a big fuss about this. I mean,
to the extent that the Defense Department influenced what scientists do, it
would matter. But good universities don't permit that, by and large-they
don't permit it just for their own internal reasons: if you started permitting
that, you'd lose the ability to do science altogether. Science simply can't be
done under those kinds of ideological constraints.
It's sort of like what happens in cancer research: Congress is funding a
lot of cellular biology because they want somebody to discover a cure for
cancer by the time they get it, but what the scientists are doing is just what
they know how to do-and what they know how to do has nothing to do

286

Understanding Power

with cancer, what they know how to do is work with big molecules. Maybe
a cure for cancer will come out of it someday, but that's sort of by the side.
And that's pretty much the way it goes in the sciences: you can work on
what you understand, you can't work on what people tell you to solve. It's
like the joke about the drunk and the streetlight: you see some drunk guy
looking for something under the streetlight and you go over to him and ask,
"What's the matter?" He says, "I lost my key." You say, "Where did you
lose it?" He says, "On the other side of the street." You say, "So why are
you looking over here?" "Well, this is where the light is." That's the way
the sciences work: you look where the light is-because that's all you can do.
You understand only a certain small number of things, and you just have
to work around the periphery of them. If somebody says, "I'd like to have
you solve this problem out here," you say, "I'll gladly take your money"-and then you go on looking where you are. And there basically is nothing
much else that can be done. If you started trying to direct the money to
solving those problems, you'd just do nothing, because we don't know how
to solve them. There's kind of a tacit compact between funders and
recipients to overlook this ...
The Favored State and Enemy States
WOMAN: Noam, people often attack you as a political commentator for
focusing your criticism against the activities of the United States, and not
so much against the old Soviet Union, or Vietnam, or Cuba and so on-the
official enemies. I'd like to know what you think about that kind of
criticism?
Well, it's true that's one of the standard things 1 get-but see, if that criticism is meant honestly (and most of the time it's not), then it's really missing the crucial point, 1 think. See, 1 focus my efforts against the terror and
violence of my own state for really two main reasons. First of all, in my
case the actions of my state happen to make up the main component of
international violence in the world. But much more importantly than that,
it's because American actions are the things that 1 can do something about.
So even if the United States were causing only a tiny fraction of the
repression and violence in the world-which obviously is very far from the
truth--that tiny fraction would still be what I'm responsible for, and what 1
should focus my efforts against. And that's based on a very simple ethical
principle -namely, that the ethical value of one's actions depends on their
anticipated consequences for human beings: 1 think that's kind of like a
fundamental moral truism.
So for example, it was a very easy thing in the 1980s for people in the
United States to denounce the atrocities of the Soviet Union in its occupation of Afghanistan-but those denunciations had no effects which could

Chapter Eight

287

have helped people. In terms of their ethical value, they were about the
same as denouncing Napoleon's atrocities, or things that happened in the
Middle Ages. Useful and significant actions are ones which have consequences for human beings, and usually those will concern things that you
can influence and control-which means for people in the United States,
American actions primarily, not those of some other state.
Actually, the principle that I think we ought to follow is the principle we
rightly expected Soviet dissidents to follow. So what principle did we
expect Sakharov [a Soviet scientist punished for his criticism of the
U.S.S.R.] to follow? Why did people here decide that Sakharov was a
moral person? I think he was. Sakharov did not treat every atrocity as
identical-he had nothing to say about American atrocities. When he was
asked about them, he said, "I don't know anything about them, I don't care
about them, what I talk about are Soviet atrocities." And that was rightbecause those were the ones that he was responsible for, and that he might
have been able to influence. Again, it's a very simple ethical point: you are
responsible for the predictable consequences of your actions, you're not
responsible for the predictable consequences of somebody else's actions.
Now, we understand this perfectly well when we're talking about dissidents in the old Soviet Union or in some other enemy state, but we fail to
understand it when we're talking about ourselves-for obvious reasons. I
mean, commissars in the old Soviet Union didn't understand it about dissidents there either: commissars in the old Soviet Union attacked Sakharov
and other Soviet dissidents because they weren't denouncing American
crimes. In fact, an old joke fifty years ago was that if you went to a Stalinist
and criticized the Soviet slave-labor camps, the Stalinist would say, "Well,
what about the lynchings in the American South?" Alright, in that case the
dishonesty's obvious, and we can easily understand why.
Now, just personally speaking, it turns out that I do spend a fair amount
of effort talking about the crimes of official enemies-in fact, there are a
number of people now living in the United States and Canada from the old
Soviet Union and Eastern Europe who are there because of my own personal activities on their behalf. But I don't take great pride in that part of
my work, particularly: I just do it because I'm interested in it. The most important thing for me, and for you, is to think about the greater consequences
of your criticisms: what you can have the most effect on. And especially in
a relatively open society like ours, which does allow a lot of freedom for
dissent, that means American crimes primarily.
Well, that's the main point here, I think. But there's also another consideration which is important-and which simply can't be ignored, in my opinion. Honest people are just going to have to face the fact that whenever
possible, people with power are going to exploit any actions which serve
their violent ends. So when American dissidents criticize the atrocities of
some enemy state like Cuba or Vietnam or something, it's no secret what
the effects of that criticism are going to be: it's not going have any effect
what-

288

Understanding Power

soever on the Cuban regime, for example, but it certainly will help the torturers in Washington and Miami to keep inflicting their campaign of suffering on the Cuban population [i.e. through the U.S.-led embargo]. Well, that
is something I do not think a moral person would want to contribute to.
I mean, if a Russian intellectual had started publishing articles denouncing very real atrocities committed by the Afghan resistance forces at the
time of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, knowing that his accurate criticism would have helped enable the Kremlin to mobilize popular support for
further atrocities by the Red Army, I do not think that would have been a
morally responsible thing for that person to do. Of course, this often creates
difficult dilemmas. But again, honest people have to recognize that they are
responsible for the predictable consequences of their acts. So perfectly
accurate criticism of the regime in Cuba, say, will predictably be used by
ideologists and politicians in the United States to help extend our absolutely barbaric stranglehold on Cuba. Your criticism could be perfectly
correct-though obviously much of what we do hear today is in fact false.
But even so, an honest person will always ask, "What are the likely consequences of this going to be for other people?" And the consequences in that
case at least are clear. Well, making decisions in these circumstances can
often be difficult-but these are just dilemmas that human beings have to
face in life, and all you can do is try to deal with them the best way you
can.
Canada's Media
WOMAN: I'm from Canada, Professor Chomsky, and when I come to the
United States and turn on the T. v., to me the propaganda all seems so blatant-I see this woman talking about guilt and abortion, there's this black
woman saying, "I'm on welfare because I'm lazy," it's just one image like
that after another, there's no subtlety to it whatsoever. On Canadian T. V.
it's more subtle: the C.B.C. [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation}
wouldn't put on the black woman saying, ''I'm lazy, I'm on welfare because
I'm lazy"-they'd put up a chart or something that tries to say the same
thing.
That's right.
WOMAN: The Globe and Mail [self-billed "Canada's National Newspaper"] also is more subtle than the papers I see here-it's not as obvious.
What I'm wondering is, how do you explain this difference in the two
countries' media systems? I mean, I don't think I could apply the "Propaganda Model" you and Edward Herman laid out in Manufacturing Consent
to the Canadian media-it really wouldn't work.
I think you could, actually-I think you're wrong about that. Let me just
give you some examples. The first part of my book Necessary Illusions was

Chapter Eight

289

made up of talks on the media that I was invited to give in Canada over
C.B.C. national public radio [titled "Thought Control in Democratic Societies"]. Okay, obviously that would never happen in the United States. 29 So
that's a difference.
On the other hand, in preparation for those lectures I figured that it
would be interesting to compare the Globe and Mail, Canada's main newspaper, with the New York Times, and maybe I'd discuss the results in my
talks. So for a year I subscribed to the Globe and Mail-which I must say
cost about $1,500 or something in the United States, and apparently all
their U.S. subscribers are rich investors, because every two weeks or so
you'd get a big fat glossy book about investment opportunities in Canada.
But anyhow, for about a year I read the Globe and Mail every day and the
New York Times every day, plus all the other junk, and at first I figured it
would be an interesting comparison. Alright, it turned out that it wasn't an
interesting comparison. Reading the Globe and Mail is like reading the
Boston Globe-it's like an ordinary, quality local newspaper in the United
States: small amount of international coverage, huge amount of business
news, and mostly picking stories off sources in the United States.
Now, it's true that over that year I did find things in the Globe and Mail
which did not appear in the United States, or which appeared only in really
remote places. And also I have friends in the Canadian media who clip the
Canadian press regularly for me, and they often find stuff there that doesn't
appear anywhere in the United States. So you're right, there are some differences. But overall, reading the Globe and Mail for a year, I didn't get a
different picture of the world than I get from reading the Boston Globe or
the L.A. Times or any other quality local newspaper in the United States.
The Globe and Mail was more local in orientation and less international
than the New York Times, but I didn't feel that it was qualitatively differentit's mostly a business paper like all the others.
Now, when I go to Canada, I do get asked onto mainstream national
radio and television a lot, as distinct from here-a lot. But see, that's because
I criticize the United States, and in Canada they like it when people come
up and dump on the United States-because the United States is always
pushing them around all the time, so it's nice if somebody comes and says
how rotten the United States is once in a while. On the other hand, I got
sick of this a couple times, and I started talking about Canada-and I was off
so fast you couldn't even see it. The first time I did it was on this big
morning radio show they have there, with this guy whose name I can never
remember ...
MAN: Peter Gzowski.
Gzowski, yeah. There's this nation-wide radio talk show in Canada
which everybody tunes into some time in the morning [Morningside, on
C.B.C.], and every time I'd go to Toronto they would invite me to come on
that show. So we'd have whatever it is, fifteen minutes, and this guy would

290

Understanding Power

ask me some leading questions, I'd tell him how rotten the United States is,
big smile.
Well, one time I really got sick of this, and I started talking about
Canada. He said some line about, "I hear you just flew in." I said, "Yeah, I
landed at the War Criminal Airport." He said: "What do you mean?" I said,
"Well, you know, the Lester B. Pearson Airport." And he says, "What do
you mean, 'war criminal'?" Lester Pearson's the big hero in Canada [he was
a prominent diplomat and Prime Minister from 1963 to '68]. So I started
running through Pearson's involvement in criminal activity-he was a major
criminal, really extreme. He didn't have the power to be like an American
President, but if he'd had it, he would have been the same-he tried, you
know. And I went through some of this. 30 The guy got infuriated.
Then I said something about Canada and the Vietnam War-Canada was
always denouncing the United States during the Vietnam War for its
criminal actions, meanwhile Canada was probably the leading military exporter in the world per capita, enriching itself on the destruction of Indochina.31 So I mentioned some of this stuff. He went into kind of a
tantrum. I actually thought it was sort of funny, but apparently his listeners
didn't-when I left, after about ten minutes of listening to this harangue, the
producer, sort of quivering, stopped me and said: "Oh my God, the
switchboard's lighting up, we're getting thousands of phone calls from all
over Canada. "
And apparently the phone calls were all just about the fact that this guy
Gzowski was being impolite-I don't know if people agreed with me particularly, but there were a lot of people who were very angry at the way he
was going about it. Like I said, I thought it was comical, didn't bother me.
WOMAN: I'm sorry, they got angry at him?
Him, yeah-and they were pretty upset, because there were a lot of calls.
Alright, so then the producer asked me "Well, look, could you go on
again?" And I said, "No, I'm leaving; I'm busy while I'm here, and then I'm
going home, I don't have that kind of time." So he said, "Well, can we call
you in Boston to do a follow-up?"-which they never do, it's an in-studio
program. So I said, "Okay, if you can arrange it, I'll do it." Anyway, they
made a big effort, they called me up in Boston, and we went through another show-in which Gzowski was very contrite and quiet, just to make up
to the audience. But that was the last time I ever heard from them; I've
never been asked on that show with him again.
And that's happened to me elsewhere in Canada too, I should say-I
mean, I've been invited to universities in Canada where they've literally refused to pay my plane fare after I gave talks in which I denounced Canada.
So you know, Canada's very nice as long as you're criticizing the United
States-try going after Canada and see what happens to you.
But the point is, I think the media system works the same in both coun-

Chapter Eight

291

tries. I don't think it works the same in detail-like, there's a labor movement
there, and there are other factors that are different between the two
countries as well which may influence the range of coverage a bit. But I
doubt that the differences in the media product are very great-and if you
examine the question in detail, I'm pretty sure that's what you'll find as
well.
Should Quebec Separate from Canada?
MAN: In Canada there's been a strong movement for Quebec to separate
from the English-speaking part of the country-do you think it would be in
Quebec's self-interest to become independent like that? And also, do you
think it would be to the advantage of American business to see that kind of
instability in Canada, or is it better for powerful interests here if Canada
just remains stable?
Well, I don't know the whole situation in detail, but my guess is that it's
in Quebec's self-interest to stay part of Canada-because the alternative is to
become part of the United States. Quebec's not going to be able to remain
independent, so it can either become part of the United States or stay part
of Canada. And given that choice, I think it's better off staying part of
Canada. I mean, if Quebec became independent from Canada, it wouldn't
necessarily be called part of the United States-like it wouldn't get colored
the same as the United States on the map-but it would be so integrated into
the American economy that it would effectively be a colony. And I don't
think that's in the interest of the people of Quebec, I think they're better off
staying part of Canada.
As for American business, I suspect that powerful interests in the United
States would more or less prefer things to stay the way they are-just because it's too disruptive: you don't know what all the consequences of separation would be. The way the relationship between the two countries is
now, things sort of work-and after all, all of Canada is going to become a
colony of the United States anyway, through things like N.A.F.T.A., so
why go and pick off one piece and have all of these other disruptive
effects?
Remember, people here were trying to take over Canada as early as the
1770s-it's not a new idea. And if you look back at the history of the two
countries, in 1775-before the American Revolution even began-the
American colonists had already invaded Canada, and had to be driven back
by the British [the Continental Congress's first act before declaring independence from Britain was to send an invasion force to Canada in the unsuccessful "Quebec Campaign"]. Then through the nineteenth century, the
only reason the U.S. didn't conquer Canada was that the British forces in
Canada were just too strong to allow it [e.g. invading American forces were
repulsed by British and Canadian soldiers several times in the War of

292

Understanding Power

1812]. And ever since then, it's just been a matter of the United States integrating Canada into our economy through other means: the so-called Free
Trade Agreement of 1989 gave that a big shot forward, N.A.F.T.A. is
accelerating it still further, and it is very quickly taking place.
Deciphering "China"
MAN: Noam, China has been in the news a lot recently, especially in light
of their resistance to intellectual property rights, and worldwide concern
over some of their extremely destructive environmental practices and
human rights abuses. What I'm wondering is, what do you think would be
viable diplomatic measures now to improve U.S. relations with China?
Well, I don't know-do we want to improve relations with China?
China's a very brutal society, a brutal government: I don't feel any particular interest in improving relations with it.
Look, the ways in which issues are framed for us in the media and in the
mainstream culture typically involve so many assumptions and presuppositions that you're kind of trapped as soon as you get into a discussion of
them-you're trapped in a discussion you don't want to be in. And I think
you have to start by taking apart the assumptions.
So I don't think we should be asking the question "How do we improve
relations with China?"-we should be asking other questions, like "What
kind of relations do we want to have with China?" And when we talk about
"China," who exactly do we mean? China has a very wealthy sector now--businessmen, bureaucrats and others, the guys who make the decisions--and when the U.S. press talks about "China," that's who they mean. But
there are plenty of other people in China too. So for example, you take
these Southeastern sections of China which are supposed to be "economic
miracles" and huge growth areas-yeah, they're economic miracles alright,
but a good deal of that growth is because of foreign investment, which
means absolutely horrendous working conditions. So you have women
from farms who are locked into factories where they work 12 hours a day
for essentially nothing, and sometimes a couple hundred of them will be
burned to death because there's a factory fire and the factory doors have
been locked so no one can leave, and so on and so forth.32 Well, that's
"China" too-and the same is true of any other country. So which "China"
are we talking about?
In fact, in this case there's also a geographical split, there's a geographical break between Southeast China, which is a big growth area, and Central
China, where most of the population still lives, and where things are maybe
even going downhill in terms of development and modernization. Well, the
differences between those areas are so substantial that some China specialists suspect that China may just break apart into a more coastal area that's

Chapter Eight

293

part of the general East Asian growth area, with a lot of Japanese capital
and overseas Chinese capital and foreign investment feeding into it, and
then a big area with hundreds of millions of people living in it which is
kind of like a declining peasant society-surely not part of the big growth
rate, and maybe even declining.33 So even within the geographical entity
that's called "China," there are regions that are like completely different
countries, and in some areas things could go back, as some suspect, even to
the days of peasant wars and other things like that. So, again, you have to
ask what exactly you mean by "China."
And in fact, if you look still more closely, the big "economic growth"
areas in China themselves are not so simple. So it turns out that a good deal
of the economic growth in those regions is coming from cooperative structures, not from foreign-based investment-I mean, nobody's really studied
these cooperatives in detail, because China's such a closed society, but
they're not private enterprise and they're not foreign investment, they're
some other thing. But certainly they have been picking up, and they do
have kind of a cooperative structure. And you don't have to go to "lefty"
magazines to find this out-there are articles about it in mainstream journals
like The Economist and the Asian Wall Street Journal and so on.34 Well,
those cooperatives are a big part of the growth of Southeast China, and they
represent very different interests from the foreign investment-driven
industrial structures, with all their horrendously exploitative conditions. So
that's yet another "China."
And like I say, within all the various "Chinas" one can identify, there always are different sectors of the population with differing interests: like, for
people working in the electronics factories and toy factories in Guangdong
Province, life is anything but pretty, they live under absolutely horrible
conditions-but there's also a managerial elite sector that is growing and getting rich at the same time. So I think the first step in figuring out what to do
about policies towards something like "China" has to be to dismantle all the
assumptions and presuppositions and biases behind the issues as they're
being presented by the institutions. And while I don't think there are anything like simple answers, on some of these issues of conflict that you read
about in the media now, I think it's a very mixed story.
Take intellectual property rights. The Chinese leadership hasn't completely accepted intellectual property rights, it hasn't completely accepted
these new developments to ensure that rich and powerful corporations have
a monopoly on technology and information-so now the U.S. is using
various sanctions against them to try to force compliance. Well, I don't
think I'm in favor of that. Like, I don't think I want to improve those relations with China, what I would like to do is to dismantle this whole crazy
system.
Or look at the fact that China is one of the only countries in the world
that imprisons its population at roughly the same level as the United Statesthe United States is way in the lead of other countries that keep sta-

294

Understanding Power

tistics on imprisonment, and while we don't have precise statistics on
China, from the work that's been done by criminologists who've tried to
make sense of it, it looks as though they're roughly in our ballpark. 35 Well,
is that a good thing-that they throw huge amounts of their population in jail
like we do? I don't think it's a great thing. And it's probable that their prison
system is even as brutal as ours, maybe worse. Well, the U.S. government
and U.S. power systems certainly don't care about that-any more than they
care about the fact that the United States is imprisoning its population at a
rate way beyond anyone else in the world; in fact, that's going up right
now. So that can't be why U.S. relations with China are bad.
There was some talk in the U.S. media a while ago about prison labor in
China-but take a close look at that discussion. The only objection to prison
labor in China that you heard was that the products of that prison labor
were being exported to the United States-hence that's state industry, and the
U.S. never wants state industry to compete with privately owned U.S.based firms. But if China wanted to have prison labor and export it
somewhere else, that was fine. In fact, right at the time that the U.S. government and the media were making a fuss about Chinese prison labor, the
United States was exporting products of prison labor to Asia: California
and Oregon were producing textiles in prisons which were being exported
to Asia under the name "Prison Blues"-didn't even try to hide it. And in
fact, prison production is going way up in the United States right now. 36 So
there's no objection to prison labor in principle, just don't interfere with the
profits of American-based corporations-that was the real meaning of that
debate, when you got to the core of it.
So what you want to do on every issue, I think, is to extricate yourself
from the way the discussion is being presented in the official culture, and
begin to ask these kinds of questions about it. I mean, U.S. power doesn't
care much if the Chinese leaders murder dissidents, what they care about is
that the Chinese leaders let them make money-and I don't think that is
something which ordinary people in the United States ought to buy into. I
mean, China's a very complicated, big story, and I don't think there's anything like a simple answer as to what should be done in terms of U.S. relations: like anything else, you just have to look at all the various subparts.
But the first step, I think, as with everything, is to reframe in your mind
what's really going on, remind yourself what the real issues are, and not get
trapped in discussions you don't want to be part of in the first place.
Indonesia's Killing Fields:
U.S.-Backed Genocide in East Timor
WOMAN: Noam, a little earlier you mentioned the East Timor massacre.
I'm an organizer on that issue in Canada, and it seems to me that some encouraging things have been happening in the big picture on that in the past

Chapter Eight

295

few years, in terms of maybe pressuring Indonesia to withdraw and stop
their extermination sometime in the future. Do you agree with that kind of
optimistic assessment at all?
[Editors' Note: Indonesia finally was forced to hold a referendum in
which the East Timorese voted for independence in September 1999. The
following discussion of the media, the great powers, and popular activismgiven before those events-provides critical background.]
Well, it's very hard to quantify, but I think you're right. I mean, I don't
know Indonesia that well myself, but people who do, like Ben Anderson
[American professor], say they definitely find something positive taking
place there. I hope so-but you know, it's really up to us what happens in
East Timor: what happens there is going to depend on how much pressure
and activism ordinary people in the Western societies can put together.
First of all, does everybody know the situation we're talking about?
Want me to summarize it? It's an extremely revealing case, actually-if you
really want to learn something about our own society and values, this is a
very good place to start. It's probably the biggest slaughter relative to the
population since the Holocaust, which makes it not small. And this is genocide, if you want to use the term, for which the United States continues to
be directly responsible.
East Timor is a small island north of Australia. Indonesia invaded it illegally in 1975, and ever since they have just been slaughtering people. It's
continuing as we speak, after more than two decades. And that massacre
has been going on because the United States has actively, consistently, and
crucially supported it: it's been supported by every American administration, and also by the entire Western media, which have totally silenced the
story. The worst phase of the killing was in the late 1970s during the Carter
administration. At that time, the casualties were about at the scale of the Pol
Pot massacres in Cambodia. Relative to the population, they were much
greater. But they were radically different from Pol Pot's in one critical
respect: nobody had any idea about how to stop the Pol Pot slaughter, but it
was trivial how to stop this one. And it's still trivial how we can stop itwe
can stop supporting it.
Indonesia invaded East Timor in 1975 with the explicit authorization of
Gerald Ford and Henry Kissinger [the American President and Secretary of
State].3? Kissinger then at once (secretly, though it leaked) moved to increase U.S. weapons and counterinsurgency equipment sales to Indonesia,
which already was about 90 percent armed with U.S. weapons.38 It's now
known from leaked documents that the British, Australians, and Americans
all were aware of the invasion plans in advance, and that they monitored its
progress as it was unfolding. Of course, they only applauded.39
The U.S. media have real complicity in genocide in this case. Before the
invasion, news coverage of East Timor had in fact been rather high in the
United States, surprisingly high actually-and the reason was that East

296

Understanding Power

Timor had been part of the Portuguese Empire, which was collapsing in the
1970s, and there was a lot of concern back then that the former Portuguese
colonies might do what's called "moving towards Communism," meaning
moving towards independence, which is not allowed. So before the invasion,
there was a lot of media coverage of East Timor. After Indonesia attacked,
coverage started to decline-and then it declined very sharply. By 1978, when
the atrocities reached their peak, coverage reached flat zero, literally zero in
the United States and Canada, which has been another big supporter of the
occupation.4o
Around that same time, the Carter administration moved to send new
supplies of armaments to Indonesia, because their army was running out of
weapons in the course of the slaughter. By then they'd killed maybe a hundred thousand people.41 The press did its job by shutting up about what was
really going on-when they did have coverage, it was just repetition of
grotesque lies by the State Department and Indonesian generals, a complete
whitewash. In fact, media coverage to this day has always completely
wiped out the U.S. record: the strongest criticism you'll ever find is, "We
didn't pay enough attention to Timor," or "The U.S. didn't try hard enough to
get Indonesia to stop its atrocities" or something like that.42 It's kind of like
saying the Soviet Union didn't try hard enough to bring freedom to Eastern
Europe, or they didn't pay enough attention to it-that was their problem.
And remember, the U.S. role in all of this has never been a secret-it's in
fact been acknowledged very frankly. For instance, if you read the memoirs
of our U.N. ambassador at the time of the invasion, Daniel Patrick Moynihan-who's greatly praised for his defense of international law, incidentallyhe says: "The Department of State desired that the U.N. prove utterly
ineffective in whatever measures it undertook. This task was given to me,
and I carried it forward with no inconsiderable success." Okay, then he goes
on to describe the effects of the invasion, which he was fully aware of: he
says, in the first couple of months it seemed "some 60,000 persons had been
killed ... almost the proportion of casualties experienced by the Soviet Union
during the Second World War." Alright, that's the Nazis, and that's
Moynihan, the great advocate of international law.43 And he's right, that's
how it happened: the State Department wanted things to turn out as they did,
and he ensured that they did. Moynihan's at least being honest, let's give him
credit for it.
Another thing that's never reported, though it's completely public and was
perfectly well known at the time, is that one of the main reasons why the
Western powers supported the invasion was that there's a huge offshore oil
field in Timor's territorial waters, and before 1975 the Australians and the
Western oil companies had been trying unsuccessfully to make a deal with
Portugal to exploit it. Well, they hadn't had any luck with Portugal, and they
figured an independent East Timor would be even harder to deal with-but
they knew that Indonesia would be easy: that's one of our boys,

we've been running it ever since the huge massacre there in 1965 that the
West applauded, when they wiped out the Communist Party and killed
maybe 600,000 people.44 So for instance, leaked diplomatic records in Australia show that right around the time of the invasion, top Australian officials
said that they would do better with an Indonesian takeover, and that
Indonesia should be supported.45 Again, I have yet to see a word about any
of this in the U.S. media.
And actually that exploitation has been proceeding rather nicely: Australia and Indonesia signed a big treaty to start extracting Timorese oil [in
December 1989], and right after the Dili massacre in 1991 [in which Indonesians killed hundreds of unarmed Timorese protesters at a funeral], the
big Western reaction-apart from sending additional arms to Indonesia--was
that fifteen major oil companies started exploration in the Timor Sea oil
fields. Happily for Chevron, there are apparently some very promising
strikes.
Well, to get back to your question: even though this virtually genocidal
massacre has received almost no coverage from the U.S. press, a very small
number of people started working on the issue-literally it was a tiny group
of activists, probably not more than a dozen.46 And finally, after a few years,
they've gotten somewhere: around the early 1980s, just through constant
pressure and organizing, they managed to get the media to start reporting on
Timor very occasionally. The coverage has been highly selective, and it still
always excludes the crucial role that the United States has played, both in
providing arms and in giving Indonesia the diplomatic support they've
needed to maintain the occupation over the years-but there has been some.47
And they've gotten some Congressmen interested, mostly conservative
Congressmen, incidentally. Wider public pressure began to develop; the
East Timor Action Network was started-and there has been a real change,
just thanks to this small, indeed growing, number of activists.
In 1992, the pressure actually got to the point that Congress passed legislation banning U.S. military training for Indonesian officers because of
their "human rights violations," which is putting it pretty mildly. That put
the Clinton administration in kind of an embarrassing position, but they got
out of it alright: they announced that the law didn't mean what it said, it only
meant that the United States couldn't train Indonesian military officers with
money from the United States itself, but if the Indonesians paid for the
training themselves-say, with money we gave them from some other pocketthat would be fine. With rare delicacy, the State Department picked the
anniversary of the invasion to announce this interpretation, and although
Congress protested, it went through.48
Nevertheless, the legislation was a very important development, and I
think it's a sign of a real change that could take place, as you suggest. I
mean, with enough popular pressure, this is one of those issues that could
turn around: the Indonesians could pull out, they may well be close to it.
In fact, if we're talking about activism, this is a very revealing case-

298

Understanding Power

because if you can organize successfully on an issue like East Timor, you
can do it on almost anything. It's a pretty hard topic to get people interested
in, you'd think, yet popular pressure here has forced things to the point of at
least symbolic gestures by the u.s. government-and symbolic gestures on the
part of the United States are very important. Remember, everyone in the
world is scared shitless of us: we're a brutal terrorist power of enormous
strength, and if you get in our way, you're in trouble. Nobody steps on
Uncle Sam's toes. So when the United States Congress makes a symbolic
gesture like banning military-training aid or banning small-arms sales, the
Indonesian generals hear it, even if they can get whatever they want from
some other country, or even from Bill Clinton in the end.
Mass Murderers at Harvard
Actually, let me give you another example of the kinds of things that
have been happening on this-this one is really relevant, it shows you can
really do things. In Boston recently there was a court case, in which an Indonesian general was sued by the mother of a boy who was killed in the
Dili massacre in 1991. Her name is Helen Todd, which explains why the
suit went through, if you can figure that part out ....
What happened is, in November 1991, some Indonesian troops in East
Timor opened fire on a funeral march with their U.S.-supplied M-16s, and
killed about 250 people. That's fairly routine there, actually, but this time
the Indonesians made a mistake: a couple of Western reporters were there
filming it all, and they managed to bury the videotape in an open grave and
have it smuggled out of the country a couple days later. The Indonesian
soldiers also nearly beat two American journalists to death, so this one
became pretty difficult for the international media to ignore.49
Well, as Indonesia was carrying out its cover-up after this with the help
of some big public relations firm they hired in the U.S. [Burson-Marsteller,
Inc.], one of the things they did was to get the generals out of the way so
nobody would see them, and one of them was sent off to Harvard, to study.
50 Alright, some local people in Boston found out about this, and they
checked with Harvard: Harvard claimed they'd never heard of him. But he
was there, he was studying at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard-so people started to protest his presence there. The protests began to
build up, there was more and more pressure, then on the first anniversary of
the Dili massacre came my favorite Boston Globe headline in history. It
said, "Indonesian General, Facing Suit, Flees Boston." And indeed, that's
what happened-he fled Boston, and hasn't been seen there since.51
Meanwhile, the suit continued on without him. There's a law in the
United States which says that you can bring civil suits for damages against
torturers and murderers and human rights abusers and so on. 52 So the judge
heard the testimony of Helen Todd, journalist Allan Nairn and oth-

Chapter Eight

299

ers, and was impressed-and the General now has a $14 million fine to pay
in case he ever decides to show up here again. 53
The same thing happened the next year with one of Guatemala's leading
killers, incidentally, General Gramajo-whom the U.S. State Department
was grooming to become the next Guatemalan President. He was one of the
big mass murderers from the early 1980s, and he was also shipped off to
Harvard to refine his skills. Well, people in Boston found out about it by
reading the Central American press, so they approached Harvard. Again,
"Never heard of him." But he was there. Alright, then Allan Nairn, who's a
very enterprising journalist, and imaginative-one of the few journalists in
the country, actually-waited until the Harvard commencement ceremonies
to move in. Harvard graduations are televised locally, and as the murderer
General Gramajo was walking up to the platform to receive his degree,
Nairn raced in front of the television cameras and served him with a
subpoena. That one, he fled Boston too. The case came to court and he was
fined $47 million. 54
Well, you know, that just shows you can do things. Indonesia is getting
worried about their image here, very worried. And it's starting to get to the
point where they might actually allow a referendum or something on selfdetermination for East Timor-it's a possibility. Alatas, their Foreign Minister, in fact made a speech a little while ago in which he described East
Timor as "a piece of gravel in our shoe": you know, we have to get rid of
this thing.55 But of course, it's going to take a lot more sustained pressure
and activism here to ever achieve anything like that. And in fact, if it's
going to be successful, that pressure will have to be international and coordinated around the world-because Britain and Australia and places like that
will be perfectly happy to take up the slack and make as much money as
they can selling arms to Indonesia if the United States ever were to seriously back off. 56
Changes in Indonesia
But there are definitely things going on in Indonesia which are quite encouraging-and which make your sense of optimism seem justified, I think.
For example, did you follow the case of this Indonesian academic, Aditjondro? There's a well-known Indonesian professor who teaches at a fairly
major university there, who recently went public about his opposition to the
annexation of East Timor during a visit to Australia-and it turns out that for
about twenty years he's been doing research on East Timor in secret, and he
released a lot of extremely interesting and detailed documentation. For
instance, he had the names of about 270 people killed in the Dili massacre,
and they checked out; he had done studies of other atrocities, he gave very
strong statements.
Well, the Australian press silenced it. Anybody from Australia here?
The

300

Understanding Power

only place it got published was West Perch, wherever the hell that is-probably some kind of cow-town in Australia. But it did get published there,
and then it kind of seeped out into the international media, pushed on by
things like the Internet. And finally it got to be kind of an international affair-though of course, as usual there was never a word about it in the U.S.
media.57
Anyway, this guy Aditjondro went back to Indonesia-and to everybody's
amazement, nothing's happened to him. I was just talking to John Pilger [an
Australian political activist and filmmaker] two days ago, and he'd just seen
him and been in touch with him-he's still traveling around the country, and
so far they've left him alone.58 Alright, that's a sign, you know. And there
are others.
In fact, I just saw one in this morning's newspaper. This week, authorities in Indonesia arrested a bunch of labor leaders, which is not good. But
what is good is that they arrested them for a reason-namely, they had been
organizing, and carrying out strikes. See, the labor movement in Indonesia
is in some ferment, and as a matter of fact, the Indonesian government recently was compelled just by internal pressures to acknowledge the existence of an independent labor union in the country. Now, I don't know how
far these things will go, but they're the sign of a change.59
Another sign is that if you talk to students from Indonesia, it's clear that
they know more than they used to. It used to be like total fascism-they
didn't know anything about politics or the world. But it's become much less
controlled in recent years: now they've kind of heard about things, they're
more aware, they're more concerned to try to change things a bit.6o And one
could go on like this-but these are all indications of internal changes in
Indonesia, and they are in part a reaction to Western pressure. And Indonesia reacts very quickly to Western pressure. In fact, if there was ever
any serious pressure from the West, the occupation of East Timor would be
over tomorrow.
This point was just illustrated very clearly, actually. Look: the United
States, Canada, England, France, Holland, Sweden, Germany, Japan, any
country that can make a buck off it, are all involved in this-so it's really not
a question of us laying economic sanctions on Indonesia to pressure
"them," the only real question is, can we stop killing Timorese? However,
there was a case recently where the major Western powers did threaten economic sanctions against Indonesia-it's not too well known, but it's extremely instructive.
In 1993, the World Health Organization voted to request that the World
Court consider the legality of the use of nuclear weapons, and issue an
opinion on it. Well, obviously the United States and Britain went totally
berserk when they heard about this: just the fact that the World Court might
hear a case on the legality of nuclear weapons is already a contribution to
nuclear non-proliferation. And of course, we benefit from proliferation,
since we're the main producer, seller, and possessor of nuclear weapons. I
mean, it's not

Chapter Eight

301

as if anybody would listen to the World Court if it said that the use of nuclear weapons is illegal (which means by implication that possession of
them is illegal tool-but it would certainly be a big publicity coup for the
disarmament movement if it did. So for the big nuclear powers, this was a
major issue. Actually, it's of particular significance for Britain, because one
of Britain's last claims to being a country, instead of like a county of the
United States, is that they have nuclear weapons-so for them it's important
on a symbolic level. And nuclear weapons are important to the United
States because they're part of the way we intimidate everyone-we intervene
around the world under what's called a "nuclear umbrella," which serves as
kind of a cover to back up our conventional intervention forces.
Well, that year Indonesia was serving as the head of the Non-Aligned
Movement at the U.N. [a coalition of Third World nations in the General
Assembly], and the 110 countries of the Non-Aligned Movement decided
to introduce a resolution endorsing this request for an opinion-that's all that
was up, endorsement of a request for an opinion from the World Court. The
U.S., Britain and France immediately threatened trade and aid sanctions
against Indonesia if, in their role as head of the Non-Aligned Movement for
that year, they submitted this resolution at the General Assembly. So
Indonesia instantly withdrew it, of course-when they get orders from the
boss, they stop. And they stop fast.61
Well, that just shows that there are some atrocities that go too far for the
Western powers: genocide in East Timor we can support, but endorsement
of a request for an opinion on the legality of nuclear weapons is an atrocity
we simply cannot tolerate. But it also shows you what we can do to Indonesia if we feel like it.
Nuclear Proliferation and North Korea
MAN: Just on the subject of nuclear proliferation-what's the real problem
we've had with North Korea supposedly wanting to build their own nuclear
weapons? The media and the Clinton administration say they're all
horrified by that prospect-is that what you really think is bothering them?
That's very interesting in connection with this World Court story, isn't itbecause part of what we claim is the problem with North Korea is that their
getting nuclear weapons would threaten the Nuclear NonProliferation
Treaty. But if we're so concerned with non-proliferation, obviously nothing
would be more of a shot in the arm for it than this World Court decision we
tried so desperately to block. Okay, that tells you something about our
motives in all of this. But actually, I think the problem with North Korea is
in fact what they're saying: the wrong guys are getting possible power,
nuclear weapons.
Look, nobody in their right mind would want North Korea to have nu-

302

Understanding Power

clear weapons. But on the other hand, there's nothing much that they would
do with nuclear weapons if they had them, except maybe defend
themselves from attack. They're certainly not going to invade anybody,
that's not even imaginable: if they ever made a move, the country gets destroyed tomorrow. So the only role that nuclear weapons could play for
them is as a deterrent to attack-and that's not totally unrealistic.
I mean, it's a pretty crazy country, and there's not very much good--there's nothing good-you can say about the government. But no matter who
they were, if they were Mahatma Gandhi, they would be worried about a
possible attack. I mean, the United States was threatening North Korea with
nuclear weapons at least as late as the 1960s. 62 And after all, just remember
what we did to that country-it was absolutely flattened. Here people may
not be aware of what we did to them, but they certainly know it well
enough.
Towards the end of what we call the "Korean War"-which was really
just one phase in a much longer struggle [beginning when the U.S. destroyed the indigenous nationalist movement in Korea in the late 1940s]the
United States ran out of good bombing targets. We had total command of
the air of course, but there was nothing good left to bomb-because
everything had already been flattened. So we started going after things like
dikes. Okay, that's just a major war crime.63 In fact, if you take a look at the
official U.S. Air Force history of the Korean War, it's absolutely mindboggling, it's like something straight out of the Nazi archives. I mean, these
guys don't conceal their glee at all, it's just this account of all their terrific
feelings: we bombed these dikes, and a huge flow of water went through
the valleys and carved out huge paths of destruction and slaughtered
people! And they say, laughingly: we don't realize how important rice is for
the Asians, so naturally they were screaming with rage! I really can't
duplicate, you have to read it in the original. 64 And the Koreans lived on
the other end of that.
Our treatment of North Korean prisoners of war also was absolutely
grotesque-again, it was kind of like the Nazis. This is all documented in the
West by now, and of course they certainly know about it.65 So there are
plenty of things for the North Koreans to remember, and plenty of things
for them to be afraid of-which is not to justify their getting nuclear
weapons, but it's part of the background we should keep in mind.
The other thing is, North Korea is in a desperate situation right now:
they're hemmed in politically, and they're struggling very hard to break out
of their total isolation-they're setting up free-trade zones, and trying to integrate themselves into the international economic system, other things like
that. Well, this is apparently one of their ways of attempting to do it. It's
neither intelligent nor justifiable, but that's a part of what's motivating
them, and we should at least try to understand that.
As far as Western concern about nuclear weapons goes, obviously it's
highly selective-like, nobody cares that the United States has nuclear
weapons, nobody cares that Israel has nuclear weapons, they just don't

Chapter Eight

303

want them in the hands of people we don't control, like North Korea. And I
think that's really the main issue behind the controversy these days.
WOMAN: Could you say a few words more about the origins of the Korean
War? I take it you don't accept the standard picture that it began when the
U.S. moved to block a Communist expansionist invasion.
Well, the fact of the matter is that the Korean War is much more
complex than the way it's presented in mainstream circles. In this case,
incidentally, the scholarship is considerably better than is usual, and if you
look at the serious monograph literature on the Korean War, you'll see that
a different position is presented than the one we always hear.66
The 1950 North Korean attack on the southern part of the country was
really the tail end of a long war. In fact, before North Korea attacked the
South in 1950, already about 100,000 Koreans had been killed-that's
something we forget. What happened in Korea is essentially this. When the
American forces landed in 1945 at the end of World War II, they found
that an already functioning local government had been set up. There had
been an anti-Japanese resistance, and it had established local
administrations and Peoples' Committees and so on, all over North and
South Korea. Well, when the United States moved into the South, we
dismantled all of that, destroyed it by force-we used the Koreans who had
collaborated with the Japanese, and in fact even reinstituted the Japanese
police to destroy it all Japan had occupied Korea for 35 years until its
defeat in the Second World War]. And that led to serious conflict in the
South, a rather bitter conflict which went on for four or five years with a lot
of people killed, and also there was a lot of cross-border fighting at the time
(going both ways, incidentally). Then there was sort of a lull, and then
came the North Korean attack going south. So there was definitely a North
Korean attack, but it was an intervention by the North into the South after
the United States had suppressed the anti-Japanese resistance movement in
a civil war.67
Now, that puts a slightly different color on it than the standard line we
hear. For example, if some country were-let's say-to conquer the western
part of the United States, and there was resistance against that conquest,
and then the resistance was suppressed with say a hundred thousand people
killed, and then the Eastern part of the United States "invaded" the Western
part, that wouldn't be just an invasion: that would be a little too simple.
And something like that happened in Korea.
The Samson Option
WOMAN: You mentioned Israel having nuclear weapons-would you expand on the significance of that? I remember you used the title "The Road
to Armageddon" for the last chapter of your book on the Middle East, The
Fateful Triangle.

304

Understanding Power

Yeah, that's something I think is quite important, actually. I mean, that
book was written back in 1982, and what I was discussing at the end of it is
what in Israel for the last forty years or so has been called the "Samson
Complex"; later Sy Hersh wrote a book about it called The Samson Option,
but it's an old story that goes back to the 1950s.68
You know the story of Samson in the Bible? At the end, Samson gets
captured by the Philistines, he's blinded, he's standing in the temple
between two pillars, and he pulls down the temple walls and crushes all the
people inside: the Bible says, "He killed more Philistines as he died than in
all of his life." 69 Well, that's the Samson Complex. What it means,
translated into straight politics-and they're pretty straight about it-is: if
anybody pushes us too far, we'll bring down the universe.
Now, in order to do that, Israel needed nuclear weapons-and they got
them, with our help.70 In the 1950s, when all of this stuff started, the threats
were kind of empty-they couldn't bring down the temple walls. But since
the early 1960s, it's been imaginable, and it's in fact something that's
discussed quite openly in Israel: the idea is, push us too hard and we'll do
something wild, we'll go crazy-and you'll all suffer.71
So for example, according to the Israeli Labor Party press, when the
Arab League proposed a Saudi Arabian-initiated peace plan for the region
in August 1981, Israel sent U.S.-supplied F-14 fighters over the Saudi Arabian oil fields as a warning to Western intelligence agencies-meaning, if
you take this peace plan seriously, you're all going to be in trouble, we'll
destroy those oil fields.72 Also back in the early 1980s, Israeli strategic analysts were publicly saying-even in English, so everybody would hear it-that
Israel was developing nuclear-tipped missiles that could reach the Soviet
Union. It may have been false, but that's at least what they were saying.73
Well, why would they need nuclear-tipped missiles that could reach the
Soviet Union? They're not going to attack Russia; they're not going to deter
a Russian attack-that's outlandish. But the idea was, and everybody
understood it at the time, that if U.S. policy ever changes course and we decide to stop supporting Israel, they'll attack Russia and draw Russia into the
Middle East-which would then probably destroy the world in a nuclear war.
Well, now it seems Russia's out of the game-maybe only temporarily, I
might say. But none of the underlying considerations have changed, and
there are obviously a lot of other similar scenarios like that around. So the
fact of the matter is, this is just going to remain an extremely dangerous
area.
Incidentally, one of the nice things about the end of the Cold War and
the collapse of the Soviet Union is that top-level American planners are
finally becoming a bit more honest about some things. So for example,
every year the White House puts out a big glossy document explaining to
Congress why we need a huge military establishment-and for a long time it
was always the same story: the Russians are coming, this-that-and-theother-

Chapter Eight

305

thing. Well, after the fall of the Berlin Wall, they had to change the computer disk for the first time. The bottom line had to remain the same: we
need a big military, a big so-called "defense" infrastructure (read: support
for electronics)-but now the justification had to change. So in 1990, the
reason they gave was no longer "the Russians are coming," it was what
they called "the technological sophistication of Third World powers"-especially ones in the Middle East, where they said, our problems "could
not be laid at the Kremlin's door."
Okay, first true statement: for the preceding fifty years, our problems always had been "laid at the Kremlin's door," but now that the Kremlin's
gone, we'd might as well tell the truth about it-because we still need the
same policies.74 And in fact, just to make sure that there always is a real
danger, we also have to sell all these Third World powers high-tech
weaponry-the u.s. in fact very quickly became the biggest arms dealer to
the Third World after the Cold War ended.75 And the arms contractors of
course know it: like, if you read Lockheed-Martin corporate propaganda,
they say, look, we've got to build the F-22 because we're selling advanced
upgraded F-16s to these Third World regimes, and we're selling them all
kinds of complicated air defense systems, and who knows, they're just a
bunch of dictators, maybe they'll turn against us-so we've got to build the
F-22 to defend ourselves from all the high-tech weapons we're selling them.
76
And of course, that's all at the cost of the U.S. taxpayer, as usual.
The Lot of the Palestinians
MAN: Noam, how do you interpret the 1996 elections in Israel {in which
the more right-wing Likud Party, led by Benjamin Netanyahu, defeated the
Labor Party, which had negotiated the Oslo Accords in 1994]? And what
do you think the effect is going to be on the peace process that the Labor
Party was instituting with the Palestinians?
I think it's going to have almost no effect on that. "Peace process" is a
very funny word for what's happened, actually-it's a "peace process" in the
same sense that it was a "peace process" in South Africa when they
instituted apartheid [the system of official white supremacy]. So when
South Africa instituted its apartheid system in the 1950s and set up the Bantustans [partially self-governing black territories], that was also a "peace
process"-it stabilized the country, there was peace for a while, and so on.
Well, in many ways that's similar to what's called "the peace process" in the
Middle East right now, although if you look closely, that comparison is not
quite fair. It's unfair to South Africa.
See, the Bantustans that South Africa set up in the 1950s were much
more viable economically than any scattered fragment that may someday

306

Understanding Power

be allowed for a Palestinian state under the Oslo Agreements. And furthermore, South Africa subsidized its Bantustans: so if you go back to, say,
Transkei [Bantustan under apartheid until 1991], South Africa gave it
plenty of subsidies-in fact, a large part of the South African budget went to
subsidizing the Bantustans, which were relatively viable areas economically. Well, Israel has never permitted any development whatsoever in the
Occupied Territories-in fact, there was actually a military ordinance that no
development would be allowed there if it would be competitive with Israeli
business. They've wanted the Territories to be a captive market, and
therefore there's been no development at all.77
Israeli reporters have covered this very well, actually. When they went
to Jordan after the peace treaty with Jordan [finalized in October 1994],
even they were shocked by the difference between it and the Occupied
Territories-and they wrote very interesting articles about it.78 Remember,
Jordan is a poor Third World country: it hasn't had any of the advantages
that Israel has had in being the chief American client-state, and before the
1967 war, the West Bank was somewhat more developed than Jordan.
Well, today the disparity is extraordinary in the opposite direction. So in
Jordan, there's rich agriculture, and highways, and factories, and other
things like that-but right across the border, the West Bank is a total disaster:
Israel hasn't allowed a cent to go into it; in fact, they've taken a lot of
money out of it.
For instance, the poor workers in the Israeli labor force over the years
have mostly been Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip-they did
the dirty work in Israel's economy. And theoretically they were paid, but
mostly theoretically-because from their pay, the Israeli government
deducted what is deducted from the pay of Jewish workers, like deductions
for pensions and health care and so on. Except the Palestinian workers
never got any of the benefits: the money for their benefits just went right to
the Israeli treasury. Well, that amount is estimated to be about a billion dollars or so. In fact, not long ago an Israeli civil rights group, partly made up
of law professors at the Hebrew University and partly just a workers' rights
group [Kav La'Oved], brought a lawsuit in the Israeli courts to try to recover for these workers the roughly billion dollars it's estimated has been
stolen from them. Well, the court recently decided the case-and it decided
that the claims were null and void because of the Oslo Agreements, which
it said have retroactively eliminated the basis for the suit by legalizing
Israel's confiscation of the funds. And furthermore, the decision said that
the purpose for making those deductions had never been to ensure equal
rights for the Palestinian workers in the first place, it was just to ensure that
their actual wages would be lower than those of Jewish workers and to
protect Israeli workers from unfair competition by cheaper Palestinian
labor. Okay? That was the real purpose of taking the money from them.
And then the court said that this was a worthy and legitimate action, just
like introducing tariffs to protect domestic production is a legitimate action:
so therefore the robbery is retroactively justified.79

Chapter Eight

307

Well, that's just one of the many ways in which Israel has taken plenty of
wealth from the Territories, including its water.80 And all of that is going to
continue after the Oslo Agreements and the recent election. So if you look
at the peace treaty, everything just keeps going to Israel-and that's not going
to change.
Furthermore, Israel is not taking any responsibility for what it's done to
the Territories during the occupation [which began in 1967]: the peace
treaty in fact says explicitly that Israel has no liability for anything that was
done in that time, that's all the sole responsibility of the Palestinian Authority. In fact, it's the only thing that the Palestinian Authority does get full
responsibility for-everything else they don't get, but they do get full responsibility for paying all the costs of the occupation. And the treaty explicitly says that if there is any future claim against Israel for something
that happened during the occupation, the Palestinian Authority also is
responsible for paying that claim and for reimbursing Israel if there are any
charges against Israel. So here as well, what's happened in the "peace
process" is not quite like South Africa: the South African Bantustans were
far more forthcoming.
Well, all of this is just going to continue after the elections-I mean, the
Likud Party would be out of their minds if they didn't persist in all this; the
Oslo Agreements are such an overwhelming victory for Israel that they'd be
insane if they didn't maintain them. So I would not expect any of that to
change.
Now, that's not the standard story about the elections in the United
States, of course. For example, the New York Times's lead story in their
"Week in Review" section after the elections said, flat out: the peace
process is dead-everything the U.S. did is finished, it's dead, it's over.81 But
I don't think that's true at all-I think that's based on a serious misunderstanding of what the "peace process" was really about. Likud would be
crazy not to persist with the relations that have been established with the
P.L.O. under the Oslo Agreements-just as the white South African elites
would have been crazy not to continue pushing through the Bantustan
process if they could have gotten away with it. In fact, the main difference
between the two cases is that in the case of the Bantustans, nobody in the
international community recognized the arrangement as legitimate-but in
the case of the Israeli policy towards the Occupied Territories now, everybody in the world at this point basically supports it, thanks to U.S. power.
In fact, the current U.S. government, the Clinton administration, has gone
way beyond any of its predecessors in support for the most extremist Israeli
policies. The Israeli press is constantly astonished by it. For instance, there
was a big headline in a recent article in Israel, which read, "Clinton: The
Last Zionist"-you know, the only one left who really believes all the bullshit.82
So you know, the most important part of the "peace agreement" is its
complete termination of any possibility of self-determination for the Pales-

308

Understanding Power

tinians: they're finished as far as this goes, they get nothing. As far as the
Palestinian refugees are concerned, it's finished. I mean, for years the
United States went along with rhetorical commitments about a "just
settlement" of the refugee problem; now it doesn't even do that anymore.
On the issue of control of Jerusalem, while the United States used to
rhetorically oppose the Israeli annexation and takeover, along with the rest
of the world, now that's over-the Clinton administration doesn't even
oppose it rhetorically anymore.83
The terms of the treaty are pretty amazing, they're really worth looking
at: they were pushed by the United States in such a way that the chance of
anything at all for the Palestinians is very minimal. So people living in the
Territories used to have two options: one was to go somewhere else (which
Israel hoped would happen, and did happen to a considerable extent), and
the other was to commute to Israel and be kind of what in Europe are called
"guest workers," what are called here "illegal migrant labor"-so they would
do the dirty work in Israel that nobody wanted, for a pittance, essentially
nothing. But now even that is being cut out-they're not being allowed back
into Israel. 84 And Israel is now turning to another source: they have by
now about 200,000 immigrants (it's maybe about 5 percent of the
population) from all over the world, from Ghana, Ecuador, lots of them
from Thailand, Romania, China, the Philippines. And these are people essentially brought over for this purpose-who just live under the most miserable conditions.
The ones they sort of like best are the Chinese, because they have a deal
with the Chinese government that if these people get out of hand-like if
they demand that they be paid their wages (which they're usually not paid),
or you know, they want to stop being beaten while they're on the job or
something-Israel can just call in the Chinese authorities who will, as they
put it, "deal with them." China's a rough, tough government, you know, so
they'll make sure that no one makes any fuss-and if they do make a fuss,
Israel will just send them home where they'll be even worse off. So the
Chinese workers are easier to discipline, because of the cooperation of the
Chinese authorities, and that's something they like very much in Israel.85
Well, that's a very brutal system, and it ends up displacing the Palestinians-so that means one of the options for survival for the Palestinians now is
gone. The other option, leaving, of course is sort of open-if they can figure
out some place to go. But with immigration restrictions being what they are
all over the world, that's getting harder and harder.
Basically there's nothing much left at all for the Palestinians. I mean, if
Israel's smart, what they'll do is transfer some production across the border
into the Territories, like the United States does with Mexico-that would be
smart from the Israeli industrialists' point of view. So instead of having to
hire Jewish workers and giving them wages and benefits and so on, they
could just move a couple miles across the border and get what the U.S. gets
in Mexico or what Germany gets in Bulgaria and so on: super-cheap labor

Chapter Eight

309

with no real standards for working conditions, and basically no environmental regulations. But there's so much racism in Israel that they're not
even considering what would at least be rational from an economic point of
view.
So for the moment, things are pretty much finished in the Territories-I
mean, you can't predict the future, but the point of the "peace process" was
to destroy the Palestinians, crush them, demoralize them, eliminate them,
ensure that the U.S. and Israel take over everything. That's why it's all so
admired here. And none of this is likely to be affected by the elections--I
mean, why would it be? There may be some mild differences now with
regard to Israel's relationship with Syria, but that's about all as far as I can
see.
See, the Labor Party was looking for some sort of arrangement with
Syria by which they could maintain the Golan Heights-which remember is
Syrian territory that Israel conquered after the cease-fire in the Six Day
War in 1967, then drove out most of the population and took it over and
settled it. And it's a very important area, partly because it has some
agricultural wealth, but mainly because the Golan Heights has a big
influence on controlling the headwaters of the Jordan River and other water
sources, which are extremely important to Israel. So Israel doesn't want to
give up the Golan Heights, but Syria won't make peace unless it formally
regains control over them-and it was likely that the Labor Party was going
to try to figure out some way of finessing an arrangement so that Syria
could have legal control of them, but Israel will retain actual control, like
maybe some 99-year lease or some deal like that that the lawyers can figure
out. The Labor Party was at least likely to toy with arrangements like that,
and maybe even begin to move towards them; whether Syria would have
accepted or not is an open question. But now it's likely that Likud won't do
that. Apart from that, though, I don't really see much likelihood of a difference in the international arrangements in the region as a result of the recent
election.
What I do suspect will change are things internal to Israel-it's only there
that there's likely to be an effect. And that's actually where the issues of the
election were. In fact, if you look at them for a minute, there's a real irony
to these elections.
Netanyahu won a big victory: the popular vote was split almost 50/50,
but if you look at the Jewish vote (which is the only part that counts as far
as policy-making goes in Israel), it was a far higher proportion, it was over
55 percent-which is a landslide victory, you know.86 And that could have a
major effect. See, the support for the Likud Party was from several sources.
They got close to 100 percent of the religious vote-because there's a very
big fundamentalist religious community in Israel, and since it's a very
totalitarian community, they just do what the rabbis say, and the rabbis said
"Vote for Likud." Then they also got a lot of the sort of chauvinist nationalist Jewish vote. And actually they got the vote of most of the working

310

Understanding Power

class and the poor as well-because the Labor Party in Israel, despite its
name, is the party of the rich elites and professionals and the Europeanized
segments of the population, and big business really likes it: I mean, they
don't mind Likud, but they really like Labor. In case you were confused
about this, the fact that the United States has supported the Labor Party
ought to be a giveaway about its real interests: the United States does not
support parties of working people and the poor.
But the point is, most of these voting blocks that joined to put Netanyahu in power have a kind of religious chauvinist element to them-you
know, they want to restore and establish Jewish identity, their emphasis is
on what are called in the United States "the cultural issues," that's what
Likud won on. And often that does have sort of a populist appeal: so Likud
got the support of poor and working people, and they got it in the same
kind of way as Pat Buchanan gets their support here-and with about as
much authenticity in terms of concern for their interests. And part of the
irony of the elections is that the people these nationalist constituencies
elected are almost pure Americans and secular-I mean, Netanyahu could
run for office in the United States and nobody would notice it, he's essentially an American, just listen to him on television. Or take his leading foreign policy advisor, Dore Gold: he grew up in the United States, has an
American accent, he's completely Americanized and secular-and he's the
chief policy advisor. So what in fact happened is that the most Americanized element that has ever existed in Israeli politics won the election on a
nationalist/religious program. And since you've got to give some crumbs to
your constituency, the question now is, how are they going to do it? Well,
that's the issue after the Israeli elections.
And right now the more secular European-types in the Israeli population
are extremely worried about it-and they're extremely worried about it for
the exact same reason we would be extremely worried about it if the Christian Right turned out to be the major constituency of the guy who wins the
Presidential election in the United States. So suppose Bob Dole had won
the Presidency here in 1996 with the overwhelming support of the Christian
Right, and chauvinist fanatics, and the "militias," and so on and so forth. I
mean, basic policies wouldn't change much as a result, but something
would have to be done-there would have to be some kind of palliative offer
to the constituency that voted him in. And that can mean things, it can have
serious effects. So those are the sorts of changes I think one can expect to
see in Israel, and it's not very clear how these internal factors will play out.
P.L.O. Ambitions
MAN: Can you add a word about the Palestinian leadership's response to
the whole "peace process"? You generally characterize the P.L.O. as a
bunch of conservative mayor-types-has that analysis changed at all?

Chapter Eight

311

Well, you know, I've always thought that the P.L.O. is the most corrupt
and incompetent Third World movement I've ever seen.87 I mean, they've
presented themselves all these years as, you know, revolutionaries waving
around guns, Marx, etc.-but they're basically conservative nationalists, and
they always were conservative nationalists: the rest was all pretense.
In fact, part of the reason for the failure of the whole Palestinian cause is
that the P.L.O. is the only Third World leadership I've ever seen that didn't
try to stimulate or support-or even help-any kind of international solidarity
group. Even the North Koreans, crazy as they are, have made efforts to try
to get popular support in the United States. But the Palestinian leadership
never did. And it's not because they weren't told that it would be a good
idea-I mean, there were people like, say, Ed Said [Palestinian-American
professor], who were trying to get them to do that for years, and I was even
involved in it myself. But they just couldn't hear it. Their conception of the
way politics works is that it's arranged by rich guys sitting in back rooms
who work out deals together, and the population's irrelevant. They haven't
the slightest conception of the way a democratic system functions. So while
it's true we don't have like a stellar democracy in the United States, what
the population thinks and does makes a difference here-a big difference-and
there are mechanisms to influence things. But the P.L.O. leadership has just
never understood that.
The extent of this is really astonishing, actually. Just to give you one example of it, back in the early 1980s, when South End Press [a radical
American publishing collective] was first coming along, it was publishing
some books which could have been very useful for Palestinians. So one of
the books it published was a very good war diary about the 1982 Lebanon
war, written by a well-known Israeli military officer who was one of the
founders of the Israeli army actually, a guy named Dov Yermiya, who's a
very respected guy and a decent human being-and he was absolutely horrified by what was going on during Israel's attack on Lebanon. So he wrote
a war diary which was published in Hebrew and was very different from
anything you ever heard here in the mainstream, giving an accurate picture
of what was going on, which was massive atrocities.88 Well, obviously no
publisher in the United States was going to touch it, but South End did publish it in English translation-and of course, it never got reviewed, no library
would pick it up, nobody knows it exists, and so on; I had a book on the
Middle East which was the same story, and there were a couple others like
that.
Well, there was an approach to the P.L.O. about all of this-and incidentally, the P.L.O. had tons of money. I mean, part of their problem was
that they were way too rich for their own good: they had a ton of money because the rich Arab states were trying to buy them off so they wouldn't
cause them any trouble. So you know, Arafat was able to broker billiondollar loans to Hungary, and all this kind of crazy business. But anyway,
the P.L.O. had tons of money, and there was a proposal to try to get them
just

312

Understanding Power

to purchase books-like, say, Yermiya's book-and send them to libraries so
the book would be in American public libraries: it was nothing more than
that.
Okay, it got up to the P.L.O. leadership, and they refused. Or rather, they
would agree to do it only if the book was published with a P.L.O. imprint
on it, saying, you know, "Published with the support of the P.L.O." Well,
you can guess what it would mean if you published a book in the United
States with that imprint on it-so that was the end of that idea. But just to do
something like buying books which never would be reviewed and putting
them in libraries which aren't going to buy them on their own, as a way to
maybe help Palestinians in refugee camps who are being smashed to pieces
in Beirut [the Lebanese city that was the focus of Israel's attack]that they
wouldn't do. And in fact, that's just symbolic: they would do nothing that
would help to build up support for the really suffering people who they
were supposed to represent-just because they were playing a different
game. Their game was, "We're going to make a deal with Kissinger or
Nixon, or some rich guy in a back room, and then our problems will be
over." Well, of course that will never work.
Actually, the corruption of the P.L.O. has just infuriated Palestinians in
the Territories, I should say. I was in the Territories back in 1988 or so, and
when you went into, say, the old city of Nablus, or villages, and talked to
organizers or activists, their hatred and contempt of the P.L.O. was just extraordinary. They were very bitter about it-about the robbery and the corruption and everything else-but they just said: look, it's the best we've got,
that's our international image, you want to talk diplomacy you've got to talk
to them.
However, by about 1992 or '93 even that kind of grudging acceptance
had begun to collapse. There was a lot of opposition to the Arafat
leadership in the Territories-and in the refugee camps in Lebanon, there
were open calls for his resignation, calls for democratizing the P.L.O., and
so on. The Israeli press knew all about it-they cover the Territories pretty
well-and certainly Israeli intelligence knew about it, because they've got the
place honeycombed. So there were articles by doves in the Israeli press
around the summer of 1993 or so, saying: now's a good time to deal with
the P.L.O., because they're going to give away everything-since their
support is so weak inside the Occupied Territories, the last chance the
P.L.O. leadership has to hang on to power is to be our agents, Israeli agents.
Israeli doves wrote articles about that, and of course the Israeli government
knew it.89
Well, okay, that whole phenomenon led to the Oslo Agreements-and
now where the P.L.O. leadership fits in is just as part of the standard Third
World model: they are the ruling Third World elite. So take a classic case,
look at the history of India for a couple hundred years under the British
Empire: the country was run by Indians, not by British-the bureaucrats who
actually ran things were Indians, the soldiers who beat people up and
smashed their heads were Indians. There was an Indian leadership which
became very rich and privileged by being the agents of the British imperial

Chapter Eight

313

system-and it's the same thing everywhere else. So for example, if you look
at Southern Africa in the more recent period, the most brutal atrocities were
carried out by black soldiers, who were basically mercenaries for the white
racist South African regime. And every Third World country is like that.
Whatever you want to call it, the whole American sort of "neocolonial
system"-EI Salvador, Brazil, the Philippines, and so on-is not run by
Americans. The U.S. may be in the background, and when things get out of
hand you may send in the American army or something-but basically it's all
being run by local agents of the imperial power, whose internal power
depends on their support from the outside, but who very much enrich
themselves by their client ruler status. Alright, that's the standard colonial
relationship, and the P.L.O. is intending to play that role.
So they have a huge security force-nobody really knows how big it is,
because it's secret, but they may have thirty or forty thousand men enlisted.
They surely have one of the highest densities of police per capita in the
world, if not the highest. They work very closely with the Israeli secret services and the Israeli army. They're very bruta1.90 And they're making a ton
of money. So you go to places like Gaza which are just collapsing, there are
people starving in the streets-and there's also a ton of construction, new
fancy restaurants, hotels, a lot of Palestinian investors going in and making
plenty of money: it's the standard Third World pattern, that's the way the
whole Third World is organized. And you see it everywhere these days--Eastern Europe is becoming that way too right now. I mean, about a year
ago the per capita purchasing rate of Mercedes-Benzes in Moscow was
higher than it was in New York, because there is tremendous wealth. Meanwhile, half a million more people are dying every year in Russia than in the
1980s; mortality for men has gone down seven or eight years on average in
the last few years; and on and on.91
Okay, that's the Third World. And that's the way the P.L.O. leadership
sees its future-and with some justice too, you know, because otherwise they
probably would have been kicked out. So now that's their role, to oversee
all of this, and they'll put up with any humiliation, it doesn't matter what. I
mean, you look at the terms of the peace treaty, it was just gratuitous
humiliation. But the P.L.O. is perfectly happy to take it. And they'll get
rich, they'll have the guns, and they'll be the equivalent of the elite in India,
or Mexico, Thailand, Indonesia, or any other place that you see in the Third
World.
The Nation-State System
WOMAN: Noam, the problems you describe in the world sound almost
chronic to me-systematic underdevelopment and exploitation in the Third
World, proliferation of nuclear weapons, the growing environmental crisis.
What means of social organization do you think would be necessary for us
to overcome these things?

314

Understanding Power

Well, in my view what would ultimately be necessary would be a breakdown of the nation-state system-because I think that's not a viable system.
It's not necessarily the natural form of human organization; in fact, it's a
European invention pretty much. The modern nation-state system basically
developed in Europe since the medieval period, and it was extremely difficult for it to develop: Europe has a very bloody history, an extremely
savage and bloody history, with constant massive wars and so on, and that
was all part of an effort to establish the nation-state system. It has virtually
no relation to the way people live, or to their associations, or anything else
particularly, so it had to be established by force. And it was established by
centuries of bloody warfare. That warfare ended in 1945-and the only
reason it ended is because the next war was going to destroy everything. So
it ended in 1945-we hope; if it didn't, it will destroy everything.
The nation-state system was exported to the rest of the world through
European colonization. Europeans were barbarians basically, savages: very
advanced technologically, and advanced in methods of warfare, but not
culturally or anything else particularly. And when they spread over the rest
of the world, it was like a plague-they just destroyed everything in front of
them, it was kind of like Genghis Khan or something. They fought differently, they fought much more brutally, they had better technology-and they
essentially wiped everything else out.92
The American continent's a good example. How come everybody around
here has a white face, and not a red face? Well, it's because the people with
the white faces were savages, and they killed the people with red faces.
When the British and other colonists came to this continent, they simply
destroyed everything-and pretty much the same thing happened everywhere
else in the world. You go back to about the sixteenth century and the
populations of Africa and Europe were approximately comparable; a couple centuries later, the population of Europe was far higher, maybe four
times as high. Why did that change? Well, you know, those were the effects
of European colonization.93
So the process of colonization was extraordinarily destructive, and it in
turn imposed the European nation-state system on the world, kind of a reflection of internal European society, which of course was always
extremely hierarchical and unequal and brutal. And if that system
continues, I suppose it will continue to be hierarchical and unequal and
brutal.
So I think other forms of social organization have to be developed-and
those forms are not too difficult to imagine. I mean, the United Nations was
an attempt to do something about it, but it didn't work, because the superpowers won't let it work. International law is the same story. International
law is a method by which you might regulate the aggressive and destructive
tendencies of the nation-state-the trouble is, international law doesn't have a
police force: there are no Martians around to enforce it. So international
law will only work if the powers subjected to it are willing to accept it, and
the United States is not willing to accept it. If the World Court con-

Chapter Eight

315

demns us, we simply disregard it, it's not our problem-we're above the law,
we're a lawless state.94 And as long as the major powers in the world are
lawless and violent, and are unwilling to enter into international
arrangements or other kinds of mechanisms which would constrain force
and violence, there's very little hope for human survival, I would think.
Now, my own feeling-I mean, big story-is that the reasons for all of this
have to do with the way that power is concentrated inside the particular
societies; that's the source of this extreme violence in the world. Remember
that every existing social system has a vast disparity of power internally.
Take the United States: the United States was not founded on the principle
that "the people" ought to rule-that's freshman Civics, it's not what
happened in history. If you look back at the actual record, you'll find that
the principles of the American Founding Fathers were quite different.
Keep in mind, all of the Founding Fathers hated democracy-Thomas
Jefferson was a partial exception, but only partial. For the most part, they
hated democracy. The principles of the Founding Fathers were rather nicely
expressed by John Jay, the head of the Constitutional Convention and the
first Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. His favorite maxim was, "The
people who own the country ought to govern it" -that's the principle on
which the United States was founded.95 The major framer of the Constitution, James Madison, emphasized very clearly in the debates at the Constitutional Convention in 1787 that the whole system must be designed, as he
put it, "to protect the minority of the opulent from the majority" -that's the
primary purpose of the government, he said.96
Now, Madison had kind of a theory behind that, which was that the
"minority of the opulent" would be elevated Enlightenment gentlemen, who
would act like some kind of ancient Roman republicans of his imaginationbenevolent philosophers who would use their opulence to benefit
everybody in the country. But he himself quickly recognized that that was a
serious delusion, and within about ten years he was bitterly denouncing
what he called the "daring depravity of the times" as "the minority of the
opulent" were using their power to smash everyone else in the face.
In fact, still in the eighteenth century, Madison made some insightful
comments about the interactions between state power and private power.
He said, we've designed a system in which the "stock-jobbers" (what we
would today call investors) are simply using state power for their own
ends-we thought we were going to create a system which would put enlightened gentlemen in control so that they would protect everyone from
the tyranny of the majority, but instead what we've got is gangsters in control using state power for their own benefit.97
Well, that's the way the system was originally designed in the United
States-and over the next two centuries, that basic design hasn't changed a
lot. The "minority of the opulent," who share a very definite class interest,
still have control of the government institutions, both the parliament and
the Executive, while the general population remains highly dispersed, sepa-

316

Understanding Power

rated, and as Madison also recommended, fragmented so that people will
not be able to unite together to identify and press their interests.98 And the
principle that "The people who own the country ought to govern it" continues to be the dominant feature of American politics.
Alright, it's not a very big secret who owns the country: you look at the
"Fortune 500" every year and you figure out pretty well who owns the
country. The country is basically owned by a network of conglomerates that
control production and investment and banking and so on, and are tightly
inter-linked and very highly concentrated-they own the country. And the
principle of American democracy is that they also ought to govern it. And
to a very large extent, they do. Now, whenever you have a concentration of
power like that, you can be certain that the people who have the power are
going to try to maximize it-and they're going to maximize it at the expense
of others, both in their own country and abroad. And that's just an unviable
system, I think.
Let's put international violence aside for a minute and take environmental issues, which people are finally beginning to look at. Well, it's been obvious for centuries that capitalism is going to self-destruct: that's just
inherent in the logic of system-because to the extent that a system is capitalist, that means maximizing short-term profit and not being concerned
with long-term effects. In fact, the motto of capitalism was, "private vices,
public benefits"-somehow it's gonna work out. Well, it doesn't work out,
and it's never going to work out: if you're maximizing short-term profits
without concern for the long-term effects, you are going to destroy the environment, for one thing. I mean, you can pretend up to a certain point that
the world has infinite resources and that it's an infinite wastebasket-but at
some point you're going to run into the reality, which is that that isn't true.
Well, we're running into that reality now-and it's very profound. Take
something like combustion: anything you burn, no matter what it is, is increasing the greenhouse effect-and this was known to scientists decades
ago, they knew exactly what was happening.99 But in a capitalist system,
you don't care about long-term effects like that, what you have to care about
is tomorrow's profits. So the greenhouse effect has been building for years,
and there's no known technological fix on the horizon-there may not be any
answer to this, it could be so serious that there's no remedy. That's possible,
and then human beings will turn out to have been a lethal mutation, which
maybe destroys a lot of life with us. Or it could be that there's some way of
fixing it, or some ameliorating way-nobody knows.
But just keep in mind what we're dealing with: the predictable effect of
an increase in the world's temperature through the greenhouse effect will be
to raise the sea level, and if the sea level begins to rise a few feet, it's not
clear that human civilization can continue. A lot of the agricultural lands,
for example, are alluvial-they're near the seas. Industrial centers, like New
York City, could be inundated. The climate is going to change, so the
agricultural-producing areas of the United States could become dust-bowls.

Chapter Eight

317

And when these changes start to be recognized, they're going to set into motion social conflict of a sort that we can't even imagine-I mean, if it turns out
that agricultural areas in the United States are becoming unviable and that
Siberia is becoming the next great agricultural producer, do you think that
American planners are going to allow the Russians to use it? We'll conquer
it, even if we have to destroy the world in a nuclear war to do it. That's the
way they think, and have always thought. And those conflicts are going to
be growing up all over the world-you can't even predict what they'll be like.
Alright, right now we do not have the forms of internal democracy or international organization which will allow us even to begin to cope with
these sorts of problems. The very concept of social planning, of rational
planning for human concerns-that's regarded as virtually subversive. And
that's the only thing that could possibly save people: rational social planning, carried out by accountable people representing the whole population
rather than business elites. Democracy, in other words-that's a concept we
don't have.

9

Movement Organizing
Based primarily on discussions at Woods
Hole, Massachusetts, between 1993 and 1996
.

The Movie Manufacturing Consent

MAN: Noam, watching your reactions to the documentary they made about
Editors' Note: The 1992 movie Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and
the Media was the most successful Canadian feature documentary ever made
and played in more than 32 countries. Although Chomsky cooperated with the
directors and liked them very much, he has not seen the film and does not
intend to, for reasons that follow. 1

your critique of the media, you've shown a lot of discomfort ...
You should see the letters I write him [indicating Mark Achbar, one of
the directors].
MARK ACHBAR: He's a good letter-writer.
MAN: Again earlier today you said something critical about it. I'm sure
you realize the politically potent effect that the film is having.
Oh yes.
MAN: And I was just wondering, if this were a film about Bertrand Russell
[British philosopher and socialist} and his powerful ideas, and how he
helped to change society with his ideas, would you be as critical of it, or
would you see it as a powerful political organizing tool?2
Both, both.
318

Chapter Nine

319

MAN: Then I guess I'd love to hear you say something positive about the
film.
Well, what I would say is exactly what you said-I mean, the positive
impact of it has been astonishing to me. Mark can give you the details, but
outside of the United States, the film is shown all over the place, and even
inside the United States it was shown to some extent.
MAN: It was in a lot of cities.
Yeah, but in every other country it's been on national television.
MAN: It came to Seattle four times and sold out every screening.
Okay, but everywhere else it was on national television. I didn't realize
this myself until I was traveling around Europe giving talks last year, and
I'd be in Finland and "Oh yeah, we all saw it on television"-it was that sort
of thing all over the place. As a matter of fact, it's gotten to the point where
I'm invited to film festivals all over the world-literally.
Well, one result of that is there's been a ton of reviewing, and the
reviewing is extremely interesting. The reviews are often written just by
guys who write T.V. criticism for the newspapers, you know, completely
apolitical people. And their reaction is extremely positive, I'd say about 98
percent of the time it's very positive. In fact, about the only thing that got a
lot of people pissed off, including Phil Donahue, was some remarks I made
about sports: people got kind of angry about that.3 But most of the time the
reaction is very positive; they say, "Yeah, really interesting."
In fact, I get a ton of letters about it-like I get a letter from some steelworker in Canada saying, "I took my friends three times, we all saw it and
it's great," and so on and so forth. Well, that's all fine. But the standard letter, the standard letter, is something like this: it says, "I'm really glad they
made this film; I thought I was the only person in the world who had these
thoughts, I'm delighted to know that somebody else actually has them and
is saying them." Then comes the punch-line: "How can I join your movement?" That's why I'm ambivalent.
Now, I don't think it's anything Mark and Peter [the directors] did
wrong; I mean, I haven't seen the movie, but I know that they were very
well aware of this problem, and tried very hard to overcome it. But somehow it's just inherent in the medium, I don't think the medium allows an escape from this-or if it does, I don't think that anybody's yet found it. I mean,
I don't think the medium can make people understand that if they film me
giving a talk somewhere, that's because somebody else organized the talk,
and the real work is being done by the people who organized the talk, and
then followed it up and are out there working in their communities. If they
can bring in some speaker to help get people together, terrific,

Chapter Nine

319

MAN: Then I guess I'd love to hear you say something positive about the
film.
Well, what I would say is exactly what you said-I mean, the positive
impact of it has been astonishing to me. Mark can give you the details, but
outside of the United States, the film is shown all over the place, and even
inside the United States it was shown to some extent.
MAN: It was in a lot of cities.
Yeah, but in every other country it's been on national television.
MAN: It came to Seattle four times and sold out every screening.
Okay, but everywhere else it was on national television. I didn't realize
this myself until I was traveling around Europe giving talks last year, and
I'd be in Finland and "Oh yeah, we all saw it on television"-it was that sort
of thing all over the place. As a matter of fact, it's gotten to the point where
I'm invited to film festivals all over the world-literally.
Well, one result of that is there's been a ton of reviewing, and the
reviewing is extremely interesting. The reviews are often written just by
guys who write T.V. criticism for the newspapers, you know, completely
apolitical people. And their reaction is extremely positive, I'd say about 98
percent of the time it's very positive. In fact, about the only thing that got a
lot of people pissed off, including Phil Donahue, was some remarks I made
about sports: people got kind of angry about that.3 But most of the time the
reaction is very positive; they say, "Yeah, really interesting."
In fact, I get a ton of letters about it-like I get a letter from some steelworker in Canada saying, "I took my friends three times, we all saw it and
it's great," and so on and so forth. Well, that's all fine. But the standard letter, the standard letter, is something like this: it says, "I'm really glad they
made this film; I thought I was the only person in the world who had these
thoughts, I'm delighted to know that somebody else actually has them and
is saying them." Then comes the punch-line: "How can I join your movement?" That's why I'm ambivalent.
Now, I don't think it's anything Mark and Peter [the directors] did
wrong; I mean, I haven't seen the movie, but I know that they were very
well aware of this problem, and tried very hard to overcome it. But somehow it's just inherent in the medium, I don't think the medium allows an escape from this-or if it does, I don't think that anybody's yet found it. I mean,
I don't think the medium can make people understand that if they film me
giving a talk somewhere, that's because somebody else organized the talk,
and the real work is being done by the people who organized the talk, and
then followed it up and are out there working in their communities. If they
can bring in some speaker to help get people together, terrific,

320

Understanding Power

but that person is in no sense "the leader." That somehow doesn't get across
in a movie-what gets across is, "How can I join your movement?" And then
I've got to write a letter which is a big speech about this. So I am
ambivalent about it.
Incidentally, one more comment about the reviews: the reviews in the
United States were intriguingly different. First of all, there weren't many,
because it wasn't shown a lot here. But they were very interesting. Do you
remember the New York Times review? That was really fascinating, that
was the most intriguing one.
MARK ACHBAR: They left your name out of the title of the film.
Well, yeah, right. But actually, the New York Times to my surprise wrote
a very favorable review, or what I'm sure they took to be a favorable
review. They assigned it to Vincent Canby, who's kind of an old-time New
Dealer, he was the big cultural critic at the Times forever, and he wrote a
review which I'm sure everybody at the Times took to be very favorable. It
said something like, oh yeah, really interesting guy, wonderful film, so on
and so forth. Then it said, obviously there's nothing to what he's saying, of
course it's all nonsense-but it was very sympathetic.
Then it got really interesting. It said, though what he's saying is all nonsense, nevertheless the leading idea is worth taking seriously, even though
it sounds crazy. And the leading idea, Canby said, is that the government is
only responsive to the fifty percent of the population who vote, not to the
fifty percent who don't vote, so therefore we ought to try to register more
people. He said, yeah, this sounds pretty far out in left field, but nevertheless we shouldn't discount it totally, something like that.4 It just flew by him
completely-he didn't see what the film was about. I mean, the most illiterate
T.V. reviewer in Tasmania didn't miss the point like that, it's only in the
United States that it has to be completely missed. And that's what it means
to "think properly."
But I do think the film is double-edged. It's certainly energized a lot of
activism. I think it did a tremendous amount of good just for East Timor
alone [the film includes extensive coverage of the unreported East Timor
genocide as a case study of Edward Herman's and Chomsky's "Propaganda
Model" 5]. And it's had a good impact in other respects. But it also has this
negative aspect, which seems to me almost unavoidable. But you wanted to
say something more ...
MARK ACHBAR: I'm sure you're aware that we have you saying in the
film, almost verbatim, what you just said: that the reason you can give talks
all over the place is because people are organizing.
Yeah, I know-but it just doesn't get across. There's something about the
medium which prevents it from getting across. I mean, I know that it was
tried, I know that that was the. idea, but...

Chapter Nine

321

MARK ACHBAR: Was it really the majority of letters that said, "1 want to
join your movement"?
Well, they say something like that: the general picture is that it's about
me-and it isn't. The whole point is, it's not. And I don't know how you get
that across to people in a film.
MAN: But it is about you, just the ideas aren't about you.
Nooo!
MAN: The ideas are for the world to think about.
But see, it really isn't-because if I'm somewhere giving a talk, it's precisely because somebody organized a meeting. Like, I'm here, but I didn't
do anything-Mike and Lydia [Albert and Sargent, co-editors of Z Magazine] did something. I didn't do anything. And that's the way it is everywhere else too.
MAN: But you're also here because of the way you grew up, and that
school that you went to.
But the same is true of everybody else who's here too. Yeah, sure.
Everybody's got their own story.
WOMAN: But the critique of the media in the film is taken from speeches
that you gave.
Yeah, but that's because other people are doing important things and I'm
not doing important things-that's what it literally comes down to. I mean,
years ago I used to be involved in organizing too-I'd go to meetings, get involved in resistance, go to jail, all of that stuff-and I was just no good at it
at all; some of these people here can tell you. So sort of a division of labor
developed: I decided to do what I'm doing now, and other people kept
doing the other things. Friends of mine who were basically the same as mewent to the same colleges and graduate schools, won the same prizes, teach
at M.I.T. and so on-just went a different way. They spend their time
organizing, which is much more important work-so they're not in a film.
That's what the difference is. I mean, I do something basically less important-it is, in fact. It's adding something, and I can do it, so I do it-I don't
have any false modesty about it. And it's helpful. But it's helpful to people
who are doing the real work. And every popular movement I know of in
history has been like that.
In fact, it's extremely important for people with power not to let anybody
understand this, to make them think there are big leaders around who
somehow get things going, and then what everybody else has to do is
follow

322

Understanding Power

them. That's one of the ways of demeaning people, and degrading them,
and making them passive. I don't know how to overcome this exactly, but
it's really something people ought to work on.
WOMAN: As an activist for East Timor, though, I have to say that the
film put our work on a completely different level. Even if you have some
trouble with it personally, it has gotten people doing a lot of real work out
there.
I think that's true; I know that's true.
ANOTHER WOMAN: Now I've got to admit it-l felt odd having you sign a
book for my friend earlier today.
Yeah, it's crazy-it's just completely wrong. In a place like San Francisco,
it gets embarrassing: I can't walk across the Berkeley campus-literallywithout twenty people coming up and asking me to sign something. That
doesn't make any sense.
WOMAN: It does feel unnatural.
It is, it's completely missing the point. It's simply not factually accurate,
for one thing-because like I say, the real work is being done by people who
are not known, that's always been true in every popular movement in history. The people who are known are riding the crest of some wave. Now,
you can ride the crest of the wave and try to use it to get power, which is
the standard thing, or you can ride the crest of the wave because you're
helping people that way, which is another thing. But the point is, it's the
wave that matters-and that's what people ought to understand. I don't know
how you get that across in a film.
Actually, come to think of it, there are some films that have done it. I
mean, I don't see a lot of visual stuff, so I'm not the best commentator, but I
thought Salt of the Earth really did it. It was a long time ago, but at the time
I thought that it was one of the really great movies-and of course it was
killed, I think it was almost never shown.
WOMAN: Which one was that?
Salt of the Earth. It came out at the same time as On the Waterfront,
which is a rotten movie. And On the Waterfront became a huge hit-because
it was anti-union. See, On the Waterfront was part of a big campaign to
destroy unions while pretending to be for, you know, Joe Sixpack. So On
the Waterfront is about this Marlon Brando or somebody who stands up for
the poor working man against the corrupt union boss. Okay, things like that
exist, but that's not unions-I mean, sure, there are plenty of union bosses
who are crooked, but nowhere near as many as C.E.O.s who are

Chapter Nine

323

crooked, or what have you. But since On the Waterfront combined that
anti-union message with "standing up for the poor working man," it became a huge hit. On the other hand, Salt of the Earth, which was an authentic and I thought very well-done story about a strike and the people
involved in it, that was just flat killed, I don't even think it was shown anywhere. I mean, you could see it at an art theater, I guess, but that was about
it. I don't know what those of you who know something about film would
think of it, but I thought it was a really outstanding film.
Media Activism
WOMAN: Noam, I agree with you that alternative media activists have to
be very careful not to re-create authoritarian structures like the ones that
exist now-like, not have a "z Channel" {i.e. after Z Magazine} that goes
about things in the same way as A.B.C. and C.B.S. But I'm not quite sure
how we can disseminate information effectively and still be egalitarian as
we do it: it seems to me there is this tendency to try to speak from a
position of authority, and we really have to fight against that.
I think that's exactly right-that's a crucial point. I don't completely know
what the answer is to that, actually-I'd be interested in what some of you
have to say about it.
MAN: Well, let's just take you personally for a second. When people ask
you where to turn for more truth and for accuracy of information, what do
you tell them?
What I usually say is that they're not phrasing the question the right way.
I mean, people should not be asking me or anyone else where to turn for an
accurate picture of things: they should be asking themselves that. So
someone can ask me what reflects my interpretation of the way things are,
and I can tell them where they can get material that looks at the world the
way I think it ought to be looked at-but then they have to decide whether or
not that's accurate. Ultimately it's your own mind that has to be the arbiter:
you've got to rely on your own common sense and intelligence, you can't
rely on anyone else for the truth.
So the answer I give is, I think the smartest thing to do is to read everything you read-and that includes what I write, I would always tell people
this-skeptically. And in fact, an honest writer will try to make it clear what
his or her biases are and where the work is starting from, so that then readers can compensate-they can say, "This person's coming from over here,
and that's the way she's looking at the world, now I can correct for what
may well be her bias; I can decide for myself whether what she's telling me
is accurate, because at least she's making her premises clear." And people

324

Understanding Power

should do that. You should start by being very skeptical about anything that comes
to you from any sort of power system--and about everything else too. You should
be skeptical about what I tell you--why should you believe a word of it? I got my
own ax to grind. So figure it out for yourself. There really is no other answer.
And in fact, if you're an organizer who's serious about it, what you're
going to try to do is help people themselves find their own answers. And
then if you can be a resource, or point them in some direction that might be
useful, or help put them in touch with somebody, or take care of their kids
while they're out looking for a job or something-okay, that's organizing.
MARK ACHBAR: Noam, one of the best things you said that didn't end up
in the film was, "It's not so much a matter of what you read, it's a matter of
how you read." When people ask me about sources for information, I recmend the New York Times as quickly as I recommend Z Magazine.
Yeah, I do too-I absolutely agree with that. Take, say, Business Week:
it's useful to read it, it's useful to read what the ruling class tells its people. You can
learn an awful lot from the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times and so on.
In fact, I think in general that people tend not to read the business press
as much as they should. Most of it is very boring, but there are things in
there that you do not find elsewhere-they tend to be more honest, because
they're talking to people they don't have to be worried about, and to people
who need to know the truth so that they can go out and make decisions
about their money. I mean, you can lie as much as you want in the Boston
Globe or something, but the people who read the Wall Street Journal have to have a
tolerable sense of reality when they go out to make money. So in journals like
Business Week and Fortune, you'll typically find an awful lot of very useful
information. These are journals that you shouldn't buy, incidentally, they're too
expensive; but you should steal them if you can. They're also in the library.6
As a more general matter, though, if you really want to educate yourself politically,
what you have to do is become part of a group-because unless you're a real fanatic
about it, you're just not going to be able to do it all by I~ yourself. I mean, I do it, but I
know I've got a screw loose, and I don't expect J . - anybody else to be that crazy. On the
other hand, a group working together can do it very well. Take a look at the Central
America solidarity movements
in the 1980s, for example-they were usually church-based groups around the country,
and they just kept working at it together. They had people going down there, they had
their own literature, they circulated information around, and the result was, there were
people I met in those groups who knew more about Central America than I do-and I
work on it hard. They certainly knew more about it than the C.I.A., which is no big
thing actually, or than people in a lot of the academic departments. But that's what can

Chapter Nine

325

happen when you start working together-and I think that's just got to be the
answer, except for a few crazed individuals here and there.
And in fact, what I just said about my own work isn't really accurate-because I certainly don't find all the information I use on my own. The fact
is, there are a lot of people around the world who are in a similar position,
and we share information together. A good deal of my time is actually spent
just clipping newspapers and periodicals and professional journals, and
photocopying them to send to people-and they do the same for me. And the
result is, I can easily get to know more than people in the C.I.A., or in any
academic research center--mainly because I have smart agents, not dumb
agents, and they know what's important and can dig things out. I mean,
mainstream scholars and national intelligence agencies don't have
very smart and perceptive people scanning the journals and the press in other countries
and around the United States, and finding what's important, doing an analysis of it and
sending it to them. The countries I'm especially interested in, like say Israel, I could
never cover the press well enough by myself, it's just too much of a job. But if I have
friends there clipping it and sending me articles, and picking out what's important, we
can share understanding. And it's the same with other places-for instance, a lot of the
work I've done on Southeast Asia and East Timor has used mostly material from the
Australian press: I just get tons of stuff from there.
And again, it's reciprocal: you do this for a number of people, they do it
for you, and the end result is, informal networks of cooperation develop
through which people can pool their efforts and compensate for a lack of
resources. That's exactly what organization is all about, in fact.
Noam, I remember in the movie you criticized the U.S. media for
insisting on "concision"-restricting news analysis to concise sound-bites, so
only conventional wisdom can be presented coherently. But in the organizing
I've done, I've found that it's important to use botn "concision" and a more indepth type of analysis, to use the two in combination. I'm thinking specifically
of trying to get people's attention through fact-sheets and quick blurbs of
information that you can digest easily, and then go on to find out more. I'm
wondering what you think about that kind of combined use?
WOMAN:

Sure, oh yeah-it's very useful to do it that way. Actually, I should say
that this term "concision" is kind of like a joke-it's a word I learned from
the media P.R. guys when I heard one of them use it, I forget who ...
MARK ACHBAR: Jeff Greenfield.
Yeah, what is he, manager of Newsweek?
MARK ACHBAR: Producer at Nightline.

326

Understanding Power

Producer at Nightline or something. He used the word "concision" to
describe what they do-you know, find people who can make their points in
600 words, or between two commercials.7 It was the first time I'd ever
heard the term. But yeah, it's around, and it's a technique of thought control.
But you can use it quite constructively too.
For example, during the Gulf War, Z Magazine ran a couple pages of
just short factual statements of what the basic story was-I think every good
organizing group does things like that. I mean, people need to have
information in the front of their minds, so that they know what the general
structure is-it's just that then you should fill in the depth. So I think you
should use the techniques in combination: there's nothing wrong with slogans if they lead you to something. But of course, we should also be
making people aware that any presentation of facts is a selection and an
interpretation-I mean, we're picking the facts that we think are important,
maybe they'll think something else is important.
WOMAN: A common response when you give people a fact-sheet is, "Why
should we trust you? Where did you get this information?" Not enough
people ask those questions, actually.
They should, yeah. But that distrust still is something that's very hard to
overcome as an organizer. I don't know how many of you have been following the Z online Bulletin Board lately [a computer network discussion
forum], but there's been an ongoing conversation there in which people
have pointed out-and they're right, I don't know any answer to it-that they'll
come to people with, not necessarily just fact-sheets, but even detailed,
elaborate arguments with a lot of evidence and data, but it's different from
what everyone has always heard, and the standard response is, "Well, why
should I believe you?"
And that's not an unreasonable response. I mean, if somebody came to
you with a three-volume work with a lot of footnotes and statistics and
mathematical calculations which proved that the world is flat, you'd be very
wise to be cautious, no matter how impressive it looked. And that's the way
we're coming to people most of the time-we're telling them that the world is
flat, and they're not going to believe all your evidence. They should, in fact,
ask questions like that. And that's just a hard situation for organizers to
overcome: you only really overcome that by winning confidence, and
helping people gain a broader understanding for themselves, bit by bit.
Self-Destruction of the U.S. Left
MAN: You travel around the country doing a lot of speaking engagements,
Noam. I'm wondering, just from going to all these different communities,

Chapter Nine

327

what do you think things look like in general as far as the movement goes,
as far as politics go-what's your assessment?
Well, over the years I think there's sort of like a tendency you can see-a
tendency towards, on the one hand, much larger groups of people getting
engaged in political activism in some fashion, or at least wanting to become
involved in some sort of progressive activity, roughly speaking. On the
other hand, the opportunities for it are declining at the same time-and
people are becoming extremely isolated. I just got a sense of it yesterday afternoon. I was getting ready to go off for a couple of weeks, so I did my
monthly making out of checks to all the, you know, worthwhile organizations around the world. And it's amazing when you see it. You take any
topic you like, no matter how narrow it is-I mean, health rights in the
southern part of Guatemala, let's say-and there are fifteen separate organizations working on it, maybe right next door to one another, so you have to
make out fifteen checks.
Well, that's what I happened to notice yesterday, but it's characteristic of
what's happening: everybody's got their own little operation, everything is
extremely narrowly focused and very small, and often the groups don't even
know about each other's existence. And partly that's the result of, and partly
it contributes to, a sense of real isolation, and also a kind of hopelessness-a
sense that nothing's going on, because after all it's just me and my three
friends. And it's true, it's you and your three friends, except down the block
there's somebody else and their three friends. The success in atomizing the
population has been extraordinary; I think that's in fact the major
propaganda achievement of recent years-just to isolate people in a most
astonishing fashion. And the left has done a lot to help that along, in my
opinion.
So what you find all around the country is huge mobs of people showing
up at talks and wanting to get involved, but nobody around with anything
for them to do, or any sense that there could be any follow-up. I mean, the standard
question after a talk where thousands of people have shown up is "What can I do?"
That's a terrible condemnation of the left, that people )..,.~
have to ask that question. There ought to be fifty booths outside with people saying,
"Look, join up, here's what you can do." And there aren't-or if
there are, the groups are so narrow that people just have a feeling, "Look, I
don't want to do anything this narrow; I mean, I'm all in favor of gay and;
lesbian rights in Western Massachusetts, say, but I don't want to devote my
whole life to that."
WOMAN: What exactly has the left done that you think is so self-destructive?
In part the problem is just divisiveness-it's passionate commitment to a
very narrow position, and extreme intolerance of anyone who doesn't see it

328

Understanding Power

exactly the way you do. So if you have a slightly different view from the
person next door on, say, abortion rights, it's a war-you can't even talk to
each other, it's not an issue that you can even discuss. There's a lot of that
on the left, and it's been very self-destructive. It's made the progressive
movements, the sort of "left" movements, kind of unwelcome-because
people don't like it; they see it, and they don't like it.
Also, there's just a huge amount of frittering away of energy on real absurdities. There are parts of the country, like California, where incredible
amounts of energy go into things like trying to figure out exactly which
Mafia figure might have been involved in killing John F. Kennedy or
something-as if anybody should care. The energy and the passion that goes
into things like that is really extraordinary, and it's very self-destructive.
Or take a look at the intellectual left, the people who ought to be involved in the kinds of things we're doing here. If you look at the academic
left, say, it's mired in intricate, unintelligible discourse of some crazed
postmodernist variety, which nobody can understand, including the people
who are involved in it-but it's really good for careers and that sort of thing.
That again pulls a ton of energy into activities which have the great value
that they are guaranteed not to affect anything in the world, so therefore
they're very useful for the institutions to support and to tolerate and to encourage people to get involved with.
Another thing is, there are just extreme illusions about what's going on in the
world-and that's the fault of all of us, in fact: we just can't seem to get over
them. Take the so-called "Gulf War"-it wasn't really a war, it was a slaughter,
but take the Gulf Slaughter. It led to tremendous depression on the left, because
people felt like they weren't able to do anything about it. Well, if you just think
about it for a minute, you realize that it was exactly the opposite: it was
probably the greatest victory the peace movement has ever had. The Gulf War
was the first time in history that there were huge demonstrations and protests
before a war started-that's never happened before. In the case of the Vietnam
War, it was five years before anybody got out in the streets; this time, there
were massive demonstrations with hundreds of thousands of people involved
before the bombing even started. And if you just look at the attitudes of the
general population, up until the day the bombing started it was about two to one
in favor of a negotiated settlement involving Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait in
the context of an international conference on regional issues, Israel-Palestine
issues and so on.s
Well, at the time, the left couldn't do anything about it. First of all, it
didn't know it, and didn't know that there were alternatives-like it didn't
know that a week earlier high U.S. officials had rejected an Iraqi offer to
withdraw from Kuwait on exactly those terms.9 But nevertheless, there is a
huge reservoir of support in the general population-it's just the left isn't
dealing with it.
In fact, the attitudes of the general population are absolutely astonishing.
For example, 83 percent of the American population thinks that the

Chapter Nine

329

economic system is inherently unfair, "the rich get richer and the poor get
poorer" -meaning things should just be radically changed.10 Well, what is
the left doing about that mere 83 percent of the population that thinks
everything has to be radically changed? What we're doing is alienating
them, or making them feel that we have nothing to say to them, or something like that.
Or I remember in 1987, when there was a big hoopla about the bicentennial of the Constitution, the Boston Globe published one of my favorite
polls, in which they gave people little slogans and said, "Guess which ones
are in the Constitution." Of course, nobody knows what's in the Constitution, because everybody forgot what they learned in third grade, and probably they didn't pay any attention to it then anyway-so what the question
really was asking is, "What is such an obvious truism that it must be in the
Constitution?" Well, one of the suggestions was, "What about 'From each
according to his ability, to each according to his needs'?" [a slogan from
Karl Marx]. Half the American population thinks that's in the Constitution,
because it's such an obvious truth-it's so obviously true that it must be in the
Constitution, where else could it come from?11 If you think about what this
means and what we're doing about it, it's mind-boggling, the chasm.
Or take the whole Ross Perot phenomenon during the 1992 election
[Perot is an American billionaire who ran for President on an independent
ticket]. Ross Perot appeared on the political scene and had no program, nobody knew what he stood for, he could have come from Mars for all anybody knew, and within a couple days he was running even with the two
major candidates. I mean, if a puppet was running it probably would have
come out even.
Or do you remember the whole business with Dan Quayle and Murphy
Brown? That was taken very seriously in the United States, it was treated as
if these were two real people-a debate between the Vice President and a
television actress; actually, not an actress, a character on a television show,
who then responded through the show [Quayle had criticized the character
for deciding to have a child out of wedlock]. Well, there was a poll done at
that time in which people were asked who they would prefer as President,
Dan Quayle or Murphy Brown-and you can guess who won.12 There wasn't
a poll done as to who they thought was real; I'm not sure what the result of
that one would have been.
But what these things demonstrate is something that is shown over and
over again in careful public opinion studies: the population is what's called
"alienated." People think that none of the institutions work for them,
everything's a scam, a crooked operation; they feel they have no way of influencing anything, the political system doesn't work, the economic system
doesn't work, everything is being done somewhere else and it's all out of
their control. And this feeling goes up across the board pretty regularly.13 I
mean, they're not aware how much it's true-like, they're not aware that in
the current G.A.T.T. [General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade] negotia-

330

Understanding Power

tions, major decisions are being made that will have a tremendous impact on the
world and on their lives, and neither they, nor the unions, nor Congress knows
anything about them. But they get a sense of it, they sort of have a feel for it.
And the point is, the left is doing virtually nothing to try to take advantage of this
situation and turn the tremendous discontentedness in some kind of constructive
direction. What I see on the left at least is pretty much the same story everywhere:
tremendous divisiveness, narrowness of focus, intolerance, unwillingness to meet
people on their own terms, plus inertia, and just madness of various kinds.
And the reason for a lot of that is-well, I think you could sort of see some of
the reasons. If you just take the Civil Rights Movement and look at its
course, I think you get a pretty good idea of some of the reasons. In the
early part of the Civil Rights Movement, in the late 1950s and early Sixties,
there was tremendous courage and dedication, and huge numbers of people
finally got involved, including all the way up to middle-class America. And
it was successful: there were big victories in the South. And then somehow
it stopped. Well, what happened? What happened was, you got restaurants
integrated, and you got things like the Voting Rights Act of 1965-it was a
little bit like what's going on in South Africa now, although there it's much
more dramatic. And you were able to establish the forms that in general are
accepted by the mainstream Establishment culture, and even by the business community-like, General Motors doesn't have any stake in having
restaurants segregated, in fact they'd rather have them not segregated, it's
more efficient. So all of that stuff worked, at least to a certain extent. It
wasn't easy-a lot of people got killed, it was very brutal and so on. But it
worked. And then it stopped, and it frittered away, and in fact probably it's
regressed since then. And the reason is, it ran into class issues-and they're
hard. They require institutional change. There the Board of Directors of
General Motors is not going to be happy, when you start dealing with class
issues in the industrial centers.
So at that point it stopped, and it frittered away, and also it went off into
pretty self-destructive things-revolutionary slogans, carrying guns around,
smashing windows, this and that-just because it ran into harder issues. And
when you run into harder issues, it's easy to look for an escape. And there
are a lot of different escapes. You can escape by writing meaningless
articles on some unintelligible version of academic radical feminism, or by
becoming a conspiracy buff, or by working on some very narrowly focused
issue, which may be important, but is so narrow that it's never going to get
anywhere or have any outreach. There are a lot of these temptations. And as
the number of people becoming interested and involved has increased, since
the issues are indeed hard, they're not easy, there's been a kind of chasm
developing between the potentialities and the actual achievements.
WOMAN: You don't think the left is dealing with class issues?

Chapter Nine

331

Not much. I mean, it's not that nobody is. And they're not the only issues
that have to be dealt with, it's just that they're the most important ones-because they're right at the core of the whole system of oppression. And
also, they're the hardest ones, because there you're dealing with solid institutional structures where the core of private power is involved. I mean,
other issues are hard too-like issues of patriarchy are hard. But they're
modifiable without changing the whole system of power. Class issues
aren't.
MAN: Do you have any strategies for the left to be able to get more on
common ground with the working class?
Well, first of all, "working class" is pretty broad. I mean, anybody who
gets a paycheck is in some sense "working class," so there's a sense in
which a lot of managers are working class too-and in fact, they have pretty
much the same interests these days: they're getting canned as fast as
everybody else is, and they're worried about it. See, in the United States the
word "class" is used in an unusual way: it's supposed to have something to
do with wealth. But in its traditional usage, and the way the word is used
everywhere else, what it has to do with is your place in the whole system of
decision-making and authority-so if you take orders, you're "working
class," even if you're wealthy.
And how should the left be dealing with class issues? Well, we have to
take that 83 percent of the population that thinks that the system is inherently unfair, and increase it to a larger percentage, then we simply help
people get organized to change it. There are no special tactics for that, it's
just the usual education and organizing. Okay, so you get started doing it.
Popular Education
WOMAN: One thing that I've noticed in reading a number of your books,
and a number of books by people like Holly Sklar and Michael Albert, is
that it's a standard practice on the left in trying to help educate people-because we are in the minority position-to document everything very thoroughly, to layout very precise scholarly arguments, to marshal a lot of
evidence and have a ton of citations. But the thing that bothers me about
that is there are a lot of people who are shut out of that world.
That's right.
WOMAN: They're not academics, they haven't been trained in this way of
making arguments. I really wish that there was something out there in the
middle ground that would not just try to persuade, but would also teach
about argumentation. Somebody told me they used to do things like that in
the 1930s, with popular education.

332

Understanding Power

Absolutely-in fact, that was one of the big things in the 1930s for left
intellectuals to be involved in. I mean, good scientists, well-known, important scientists like Bernal [British physicist] and others just felt that it was a
part of their obligation to the human species to do popular science. So you
had very good popular books being written about physics, and about mathematics and so on-for instance, there's a book called Mathematics for the
Million which is an example of it.14
WOMAN: Yeah, I've heard of that.
Well, that guy came out of the left. And the point is, those people just
felt that this kind of knowledge should be shared by everyone. In fact, one
of the things I find most astonishing about the current left-intellectual scene
is that what the counterparts of these people today are telling the general
public is, "You don't have to know about this stuff, it's all just some white
male power-play-and besides, astrology's the same as physics: it's all just a
discourse, and a text, and this that and the other thing, so forget about it, do
what comes natural; if you like astrology, it's astrology." I mean, this is so
different in character from what was just assumed automatically in the days
when there were live popular movements, it's amazing.
If you're privileged enough to, say, know mathematics, and you think
you're a part of the general world, obviously you should try to help other
people understand it. And the way you do it, for example, is by writing
books like Mathematics for the Million, or by giving talks in elementary
schools and things like that. In fact, involvement in popular education goes
well beyond writing books: it means having groups, giving talks, workers'
education, all sorts of stuff. And the fact that people on the left aren't doing
those things today I think is a real tragedy-and also part of the really selfdestructive aspect of a lot of what's been happening, in my opinion. These
are things that have always been a part of live political movements.
In fact, workers' education used to be a huge thing in the United States.
For example, A. J. Muste [American pacifist and activist] worked in workers' education for a long time, and the working-class schools he helped set
up were significant and big-people who hadn't gone through elementary
school came to them, and really learned a lot. Incidentally, Muste was one
of the most important people of this century in the United States-of course,
nobody knows about him, because he did the wrong things, but he was
really a leading figure in the sort of left-libertarian movement.IS
John Dewey [American philosopher and educator] was also very much
involved in popular education, and part of it was an attempt to do just this
kind of thing. So Dewey worked with Jane Addams [American social
worker and suffragist] and others in Chicago during the Progressive Period
on community development programs and so on-in fact, the whole progressive school movement came out of that, and it very much had this kind
of democratizing commitment and a commitment to industrial democracy,
which was considered a central part of it all.16

Chapter Nine

333

In fact, there were schools like this set up all over the place-for example,
in England several of the colleges in the big universities, including Oxford,
are working-class colleges: they came out of the labor movement, and are
directed to educating working people. And even right around here there's
Cape Cod Community College, which like a lot of community colleges has
people teaching in it whose interests really are this. Community colleges
and urban colleges in general have mostly working-class students, and they
can be a very good way to reach people. A lot of activists have in fact
chosen to do that-there are people teaching in community colleges all over
the place for precisely these reasons.
So you're right: there really ought to be more efforts put into things like
these-they would be a very important step towards reconstituting the kinds
of popular movements we need.
Third- Party Politics
WOMAN: What do you think about working through the electoral process
as a strategy for activists to pursue at this point? Is that a viable way to
spend one's energy, if ultimately what we're trying to change is the basic
structure of the economy?
Well, I think it's possible to work through the electoral process. But the
point we have to remember is, things will happen through the electoral
process only if there are popular forces in motion in the society which are
active enough to be threatening to power.
So for example, take the Wagner Act of 1935 [i.e. the National Labor
Relations Act], which gave American labor the right to organize for the
first time.I? It was a long time coming-most of Europe had the same rights
about fifty years earlier-and it was voted through by Congress. But it wasn't
voted through by Congress because Franklin Roosevelt liked it, or because
he was a liberal or anything like that-in fact, Roosevelt was a conservative,
he had no particular interest in labor.Is The Wagner Act was voted through
by Congress because the people who do have power in the society
recognized that they'd better give workers something, or else there was
going to be real trouble. So therefore it was voted through, and workers got
the right to organize-and they kept that right as long as they were willing to
struggle for it, then they basically lost it, it doesn't get enforced much
anymore.
So you can get things through the electoral process, but the electoral
process is really only a surface phenomenon: a lot of other things have to
be happening in the society for it to be very meaningful.
MAN: What about trying to get proportional representation in the United
States as a way of maybe developing a viable labor party, which could help
articulate more popular interests and broaden the range of political debate

334

Understanding Power

generally? [Proportional representation refers to an electoral system by
which legislative seats are assigned according to the proportion of votes
that each party receives rather than by majority vote in each district, which
encourages the proliferation of parties and gives minority voters better
representation. 19 J It seems to me that in Canada, the fact that they have a
labor party makes people somewhat more attuned to issues that Americans
largely miss, like workers' issues for example.
That's right-Canada's an interesting case: it's a pretty similar society to
us, except different somehow. It's much more humane. It has the same corporate rule, the same capitalist institutions, all of that's the same-but it's just
a much more humane place. They have a kind of social contract that we
don't have, like they have this national health-care system which makes us
look bad because it's so efficient. And that is related to their having a laborbased party, I think-the New Democratic Party in Canada [N.D.P.] isn't
really a labor party, but it's kind of labor-based. However, that party's ability to enter the political system in Canada wasn't a result of having proportional representation, it was due to the same thing that would be necessary
to get any kind of change like proportional representation in the first place:
a lot of serious popular organizing.
Look, if you have a political movement that's strong enough that the
power structure has to accommodate it, it'll get accommodated in some
fashion-as in the case of union organizing rights here, the Wagner Act. But when that
movement stops being active and challenging, those rights just aren't going to
matter very much anymore. So I think that pushing for something like
proportional representation could be worth doing if it's part of a wider organizing
campaign. But if it's just an effort to try to put some people into Congress and
that's it, then it's pretty much a waste of your time. I mean, there is never any
point in getting some person into office unless you can continue forcing them to
be your representative, and they will only continue to be your representative as
long as you are active and threatening enough to make them do what you want,
otherwise they're going to stop being your representative.
This point has been understood forever, actually. So if you go back to James
Madison, who framed a lot of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights and so
on, he pointed out that, as he put it, a "parchment barrier" will never stand
in the way of oppression-meaning, writing something down on paper is
totally worthless by itself: if you fight for it, you can make it real,
otherwise you'll just have really nice things on paper.20 I mean, Stalin's
constitution was just about the nicest constitution around-but it was a
parchment barrier. And the same is true of every other part of politics too,
including having your representative in Congress.
So you can vote for Gerry Studds [liberal Massachusetts Congressman]
if you're from around here, and he'll do some nice things-but he also voted
for N.A.F.T.A. [the North American Free Trade Agreement]. And

Chapter Nine

335

that was against the will of a lot of his constituents-just because those
constituents weren't making it clear enough to their representative what he
had to do. 1 mean, the anti-N.A.F.T.A. activity that went on in the country
was important, and it went way beyond anything 1 ever thought it would,
but it still wasn't enough to get people like Gerry Studds to come along
when it was needed-and he's a good guy, like 1 gave money to the Studds
campaign. It's just that when you weighed all of the pressures, there wasn't
enough of a popular movement to get them to come through when it mattered.
This was also part of the problem with the Rainbow Coalition, in my
opinion [progressive political organization led by Jesse Jackson]. 1 mean,
Jesse Jackson was in a very strong position a couple years ago with the
Rainbow Coalition, and he had a choice. His choice was, "Am 1 going to
use this opportunity to help create a continuing grassroots organization
which will keep on working after the election, or am 1 going to use it as my
own personal vehicle of political promotion?" And he more or less chose
the latter-so it died. Therefore it was a complete waste of time: anybody
who spent time working on that campaign was wasting their time, because
it was used as an electoral platform, and that never makes sense. I mean,
whenever somebody says "I want to become President," you can forget it--as President, they won't be any different from George Bush.
So as far as 1 can see, getting proportional representation in the United
States today would have basically no effect, the effect would be essentially
zilch-just because there's nothing around to take advantage of it. On the
other hand, if it was passed at a time when you had popular grassroots organizations of the kind that developed, say, in Haiti in the late 1980s, sure,
then it could make a difference. But of course, it's only under those circumstances that you would ever get proportional representation in the first
place.
So in my view, any of these things could be fine if they're being used as
organizing tools to try to get things going: they're a waste of time if you actually take them seriously in themselves, but if they're understood simply as
a part of larger popular struggles-so this is what you're focusing on right
now, but the purpose isn't to get some words written down somewhere or
some person into office, but rather it's to get people to understand the importance of the words and the need to keep fighting for them-yeah, then it
can mean something.
WOMAN: So you think that trying to develop a third party here might be
worth doing?
Sure, absolutely-I think that could be a very important step. Take
Canada again: why does Canada have the health-care program it does? Up
until the mid-1960s, Canada and the United States had the same capitalist
health service: extremely inefficient, tons of bureaucracy, huge administra-

336

Understanding Power

tive costs, millions of people with no insurance coverage-exactly what
would be amplified in the United States by Clinton's proposals for "managed competition" [put forward in 1993].21 But in 1962 in Saskatchewan,
where the N.D.P. is pretty strong and the unions are pretty strong, they
managed to put through a kind of rational health-care program of the sort
that every industrialized country in the world has by now, except the United
States and South Africa. Well, when Saskatchewan first put through that
program, the doctors and the insurance companies and the business community were all screaming-but it worked so well that pretty soon all the
other Provinces wanted the same thing too, and within a couple years guaranteed health care had spread over the entire country. And that happened
largely because of the New Democratic Party in Canada, which does provide a kind of cover and a framework within which popular organizations
like unions, and then later things like the feminist movement, have been
able to get together and do things.
Now, in the United States there are also a lot of popular organizations,
but they're all separate, there's no framework to start bringing them together. So developing a popularly-based third party here could be a very
important step towards that, and I think it should be pursued.
In fact, there have even been some encouraging developments in recent
years in getting something like that off the ground-I'm thinking of the
emergence of the New Party, specifically, which is sort of trying to follow
the Canadian model. So again, I don't think that we should have any illusions about working through the political system, and I'm not much of a fan
of political parties-but the New Party is really the first serious third--party
alternative that I've seen in the United States: seriously thought-out, trying
to create grassroots structures, using politics the way it ought to be used, as
an organizing and pressuring technique, and hoping ultimately to get to the
point where it could have real influence. Now, they're not going to make
structural reforms-that requires much bigger changes, changes in the
institutions. I mean, when the N.D.P. got into power in Ontario in 1990,
they couldn't really do anything, they just carried out the normal right-wing
policies, and in the next national election [in 1993] they got like two votes,
nobody wanted to bother with them anymore. But even given those
limitations, I still think it's important for a country to have something like
that-there's a lot of potential to help make people's lives better, and it
certainly could be a basis for moving further and pressing for larger
changes.
In fact, that same kind of thinking extends to electoral politics in general, in my view. I mean, right now voting decisions in the United States
are pretty subtle tactical matters, in which the policy differences between
the two major parties are not great. But just because I say they're "tactical,"
I don't mean to demean it: the decisions that have serious human consequences and matter for people are mostly tactical judgments, after all. Like,
we can have big discussions about what society ought to look like in the fu-

Chapter Nine
337
ture, which is fine, but that doesn't affect what happens to people in their
lives right now, except extremely indirectly. What happens to people in
their daily lives usually depends on small, difficult, tactical assessments
about where to put your time and energy-and one of those decisions is
whether you should vote, and if so, who should you vote for. And that can
be an extremely important decision, with significant implications.
So for example, we have a national election coming up in the United
States soon [in 1996], and I don't really know of any very strong arguments
one way or another about who to vote for-but that's not to say that that
judgment is an unimportant one: I think it's very important. I mean, I'll vote
for Clinton, holding my nose-but the reason has nothing at all to do with
big policy issues; there I can't really see too much difference. What it has to
do with are things like who's going to get appointed to the judiciary: there
are some differences between the Republicans and Democrats on questions
like that, and who's appointed to the judiciary happens to have a big effect
on people's lives. They may be small policy differences when you look at
the big picture-but remember, there's a huge amount of power out there,
and small policy differences implementing a huge amount of power can
make big differences to people. Or there might be a slight difference in
things like the earned income tax credit [a tax refund program for poor
working individuals and families]. Okay, that makes a lot of difference for
people whose kids are hungry in downtown Boston, say. So that'll be my
decision in this election-again, holding my nose. And that's the way it is at
the upper levels of our political system generally, I think.
Actually, one way for third parties to address this situation is to run "fusion" candidates-meaning, you have your own third-party ballot-line which
stands for whatever you stand for, say for social-democratic-type programs,
but then you have that ballot-line vote go to one of the main--party
candidates in the election, based on these sort of tactical decisions. That's
possible in some jurisdictions. And it's a compromise way for a third party
to preserve a genuine policy identity and commitment, while nevertheless
letting people make the small tactical voting choices that can make a real
difference to people-and I think it's a very plausible compromise.
Boycotts
MAN: Do you think it would help to undermine corporate power if people
were to begin making consumer choices that directly affect companies like
United Fruit [renamed Chiquita], which are the most actively involved in
exploiting Third World countries-like, stop buying their bananas, say, stop
buying their coffee?
Again, if only a few people do it, it isn't going to have any effect-it just
means that some guy picking bananas in East Costa Rica isn't going to have

338

Understanding Power

enough money to feed his children tomorrow. But if it's done on a large
enough scale that it can have an impact on the corporate structure, sure,
then it could mean something.
I mean, suppose you stopped consuming altogether-you can live on
subsistence farming in the United States in a lot of places, so suppose you
did that. The effect on the general society would be exactly as if you
decided to commit suicide: it would simply go on as before, but without
you. Bear in mind that a lot of these things about "let's really make a
change by withdrawing from the world and living a decent life" have
precisely the social effect of suicide-well, that's a little too extreme, because
people might notice and become interested and involved, so maybe it's a
little bit more than suicide. But not a lot. And in fact, the only thing that
does differentiate it from suicide is when you use it as an organizing tool,22
Otherwise not, otherwise in fact it is just like suicide.
WOMAN: Would you ever advocate a boycott as a tactic, though,
assuming that it was coordinated and on a large enough scale?
Well, tactics depend on the specific situations you're faced with-I don't
think you can say very much worthwhile about them in the abstract. So
there might be a particular moment when a boycott of something would be
helpful. But as a general matter, I don't think they really make a lot of
sense, frankly.
I mean, suppose we got millions of people to stop buying: what would
happen? The economic system barely functions as it is-I mean, the
contemporary economic system is a complete catastrophe, an absolutely
catastrophic failure. For instance, the International Labor Organization recently gave its latest estimate of unemployment worldwide-"unemployment" they define as meaning not having enough work to meet a
subsistence level, so maybe you can sell some handkerchiefs at a street
corner or something, but you don't have enough work to survive on your
own. They estimate that at about 30 percent of the world's populationwhich makes it a lot worse than the Great Depression.23 Alright? Now,
there's a ton of work to be done in the world-everywhere you look there's
work that ought to be done. And the people who don't have work would be
delighted to do it. So what you've got is a huge number of idle hands, a vast
amount of work that ought to be done, and an economic system that is
incapable of putting those two things together. Okay, absolutely
catastrophic failure. Boycotts aren't going to overcome that failure, they're
just going to make it worse.
So you know, they may be worthwhile as a tactic at some point, but
what's really required is just a complete rethinking of the entire nature of
economic interactions and structures-there really is no other way to overcome this whole massive failure of the economy.

Chapter Nine

339

"A Praxis"
MAN: Dr. Chomsky, as I listen to you talk and give your marvelous analysis of the destructions of capitalism and American foreign policy, and even
as I hear you today give us some of your perspectives on more practical issues of activism, I'm often struck by what I hear to be an underlying generality to your advice: it seems there's almost the absence of a concrete
program. Don't you think that it would be helpful to give people a little bit
more guidance about what to do specifically, especially since people are so
directionless these days?
What I'm saying is, I don't see a revolutionary "praxis" in your politicsand I'm wondering why that is.
Well, when you say there's no "praxis," I don't exactly know what that
means. There are plenty of things that can be done; I don't think they have
to be described with fancy terms. And we just do the things that can be
done, the kinds of things that are the next stage. There aren't any general
formulas about that-you just ask where you are, what are the problems that
exist, where are people ready to move? And then you try to do something
with them. There's a whole spectrum of actions you can take, and there's no
simple answer as to which ones should have the priority-people judge
differently.
But I'd be very skeptical if somebody comes along with a "praxis"-you
know, some formula saying, "Here's the way we're supposed to do it." I'd
be really skeptical about that, if I were you.

The War on Unions
WOMAN: Noam, I know a lot of people fighting for Workmen's Compensation [i.e. for on-the-job injuries} and things like that, and sometimes
they've said to me, "If I try to get together with other workers to press for
changes, I'm going to get in trouble, I'll lose my job-what the hell can I do
except look out for Number One?" They're not happy about that option,
nobody's happy about saying, "All I can do is duck and cover and look out
for myself, never be loyal to anybody else or support other workers" -it's
just that there are these consequences that they can't deal with. I don't have
an answer for them, I really don't know what to say to that.
Yeah, there really is no answer, unless there are organizations-in this
case, unions-that are strong enough to fight for them. I mean, if you don't
have solidarity and organization and you're just out there alone fighting a
big system of power, there's not very much that you can do. It's like if
you're walking down the streets of Haiti [under the military junta] and
somebody

340

Understanding Power

comes up to you and says, "What should I do?"-the answer "Go attack the
police station" is not very helpful.
The only thing that these people looking for workmen's comp can do is
be involved in strong enough organizations, and in this case that means
unions-or maybe they can get somebody from the National Lawyers Guild
[progressive law organization] or something to help them work through the
legal structures. Short of having an organization that you can be part of that
will defend you, though, there's really not much you can do-and that's
precisely why there's been such a passionate effort by the business world
and the government to try to destroy unions. I mean, ever since the Wagner
Act first got passed in 1935, there has been a sustained campaign in the
United States to destroy the labor movement and to overcome this tragedy.
And there's a very good reason for that: if people are all alone, they really
are defenseless, they just assume "I can only look out for myself," and then
that builds up a real privatization of interests, which in turn contributes to
their oppression. But of course, the dynamic also goes the other way toowhen you organize with other people, you develop your sense of solidarity
and sympathy, and that helps break down the oppression.
In fact, this all goes back to James Madison's point again: there are
"parchment barriers" which say that you can't fire workers for trying to
organize, there are federal laws that make that completely illegal. But because for whatever reason people have not been able to fight to maintain
those laws, the government just doesn't enforce them anymore. I mean, the
reason the people you're talking about can be fired is that the government is
a criminal operation: it doesn't enforce the laws. Therefore employers have
this real weapon over people's heads, which is a very powerful one, as you
say.
Actually, there was an interesting article about this in Business Week a
little while ago. It was about the destruction of unions in the United States,
and what they pointed out-kind of casually, not making a big point of itis
that part of the way that unions have been destroyed here is just by a huge
increase in illegal firings, particularly during the 1980s. The Wagner Act
makes that flatly illegal, but since the federal government is a criminal operation and doesn't enforce the laws, employers just do whatever they feel
like. The same thing was true with industrial accidents: they shot way up in
the 1980s, because the Reagan administration just refused to enforce the
laws regulating workplace safety. And this is all right out in the open--like,
Business Week says it straight out: "illegal firings," nobody's trying to cover
it Up.24
WOMAN: Can't employers fire employees "at will" in the U.S., though?
No-if employees are trying to organize and they get fired, that's against
the law, it's flatly illegal.25

Chapter Nine

341

WOMAN: It's tough to prove, though.
It's tough to prove if the government won't prosecute, or if the courts
won't hear it, or if the National Labor Relations Board is set up in such a
way that you've got to work for five years before your case ever gets heardby which time everybody's either gone away or dropped dead or something.
I mean, these are all just various techniques of state criminality to evade
very clear legislation. In fact, the United States has been censured by the
International Labor Organization for violating international labor standardsit's probably the only industrial society the I.L.O. has ever censured,
because this is a U.N. agency, so it's largely paid for by the U.S., and they
never say anything bad about the people who pay their wages. But the
I.L.O. in 1991 censured the United States for violating international labor
standards at the time of the Caterpillar strike, when the government permitted the corporation to bring in scabs [workers who cross the picket-line]
to break the strike.26
And the same sorts of things are happening under Bill Clinton too. So
one of the campaign issues that got Clinton a lot of labor support in 1992
was that he promised to put some teeth in the law that makes it illegal for
employers to hire scabs-which basically destroys any strike. I mean, when
you've got a huge unemployed labor force, and you don't have a sense of
working-class solidarity in the population, and a ton of people are desperate, if you go on strike and get replaced by scabs, okay, that's the end of the
strike-so that kills strikes. Now, this is unheard of: no modern country
permits this. In fact, at the time that the I.L.O. censured the U.S., only the
U.S. and South Africa allowed it, though by now I think it's spreading for
all kinds of reasons, especially in England. But one of Clinton's big campaign promises in '92 was that he was going to put a stop to this practice--and just now he's sort of backed off from that, under the threat of a
filibuster [the practice of blocking legislation in Congress by indefinitely
prolonging debate]. The people in Congress who were pushing it said,
rightly or wrongly, that they couldn't overcome a filibuster-and so he
stopped.
Well, that's again the same interaction: there are already laws on the
books that make hiring scabs illegal, but laws only get enforced if people
are willing to fight for them, otherwise they don't get enforced. I mean, it's
nice to have the laws, but it's nice partly because it makes it easier to struggle for your rights-it's not that the laws give you the rights. Laws can be on
the books and mean absolutely nothing, as in this case.
There are also a number of other tricks which are being used all around
the world to destroy unions. So for example, in England under Margaret
Thatcher [Prime Minister from 1979 to '90], which was very similar to Reaganite America in many ways, there was also a major effort to try to
destroy the labor movement-and by now it's pretty much gone there too. It's
not quite as bad as the United States yet, but it's going that way. And
remember,

342

Understanding Power

the labor movement used to be very strong in England, just like in Canada.
In fact, the British labor movement led the way in a lot of respects in pushing through the wave of modern social reform after the Second World War.
But now employers in England are allowed to pay differential wages to
workers depending on whether or not they unionize-in other words they
can say, "If you refuse to join the union I'll increase your wages; if you join
the union I'll lower your wages." Well, that's devastating for unions.
Or take another trick they just instituted there, which is absolutely lethal
for organizing. Union dues have traditionally been paid by a check-off: you
agree that some part of your salary is going to be deducted for union dues,
just like some part of it gets deducted for Social Security. Well, the Conservative John Major government in England just passed an administrative
regulation or something that requires all union members to regularly renew
their authorization for this check-off-meaning the British labor movement
now has to reach six million people somewhere and periodically get them
to sign a statement saying, "I agree to continue doing this." Alright, that is
just an incredible burden. Even the mainstream British press pointed out
that if you tried to do that to banks, like make banks regularly get written
agreements from everybody they've ever lent money to or something that
they're still going to pay it back, the financial system would probably
collapse.28 And the labor movement mostly runs by unpaid volunteers--they
don't have the money to pay people, so it's usually volunteers who keep the
unions going. So now those volunteers have to take time off from their
other activities to try to round up six million people from all around the
country, who've moved since you last heard of them and this and that, just
to get them to sign some statement they've already signed before allowing
the unions to make this check-off of dues.
Well, that's the kind of thing that's been happening all over the place in
recent years-and it's all going to keep on going. I mean, there are all kinds
of ways in which power can try to destroy popular organizations: it doesn't
have to be death squads like it is in the Third World. And unless there is
enough popular pressure and organizing to overcome it-and in fact,
progress-they'll win. So I don't know how many of you have tried to organize these days, but it's extremely hard-partly just because there are a lot
of barriers that have been set up to make it very difficult to do, many of
them instituted in the 1980s. But they're obstacles we're just going to have
to overcome.
Inner-City Schools
WOMAN: Noam, a number of activists I know are on welfare, and their
children are going to public schools that increasingly are resembling prisons: there are armed guards in the halls, there's a high level of violence.
And I know some of these kids, they're really brutalized-if they're not
chroni-

Chapter Nine

343

cally depressed, then they're violent: violent in language, violent in fact.
One of the mothers recently told me-and she's a pretty radical person--that
the conservative "School Choice Movement" [whereby the state would
subsidize tuition at private institutions instead of administering public
schools] really is appealing to her. It surprised me, but she said, "The left
isn't addressing the problem of the schools, the left is sentimental about
public education. " I'm wondering what you think about that?
I think there's a lot of truth to it. I mean, it's the same with crime-people
are really scared, especially people in poor neighborhoods. It's not so bad
where I live, in the fancy suburbs, but if you live in a poor neighborhood,
it's frightening-unpleasant things can happen to you and your children. And
when it's frightening, people want something to protect themselves-and if
protecting yourself means having armed guards all around, or calling for
more use of the death penalty or something, well, then you'll go for that. If
the choices are narrowed to your child being attacked in the halls and
getting a rotten education, or having "private choices"-sure, people will
pick the "private choices." But the task of the left is to extend those options,
to let people know that there is another option, the option of a decent life:
which is neither schools as prisons, nor pull yourself out and let everybody
else stay in the prison-which is what the whole "privatization of education"
story is really about.
But sure: if people can't see any other alternatives, they'll say "I'll pull
myself out." In fact, I did the same thing. Why do I live in the suburbs? Because my wife and I wanted our kids to go to a good school, first person to
tell you. Of course I did that, and people who have that option will do itbut
the idea is to set up a system in which people don't ever have to face that
narrow set of alternatives, all of them awful.
I do think it's true, though, that at this point the left is basically offering
nothing in the way of alternatives. What it ought to be getting across is the
message, "Look, this is not the full range of alternatives, there are others"
-and then it should present the others. And the others are not utopian. I
mean, just look at the history of inner-city schools in the United States:
there was a period, not so far back, when many of the inner-city schools
here were extremely good-in fact, some of the black inner-city schools in
Washington had among the highest college-acceptance rates in the country.
29
Or take my own family, for example: they were immigrants from Eastern
Europe-not peasants, but from a very poor Eastern European backgroundand they went through ordinary city schools in New York, some of them
went to the City College, and they got very good educations. In fact, the
City College of New York used to be one of the best schools in the country:
public city school, no reason why it shouldn't be.
So good public education can certainly be achieved-but of course, like
everything else, it's going to depend on the general social and economic
structure in which it operates. I mean, it's true that things like violence and

344

Understanding Power

rotten schools are destroying the cities-but they're destroying them because
of a social structure that we've just got to change, from the bottom up. And
yes, until people can see some hope of changing it, they're going to pick
from within the rotten set of options that are being presented to them.
Defending the Welfare State
WOMAN: Noam, since you're an anarchist and often say that you
oppose the existence of the nation-state itself and think it's incompatible
with true socialism, does that make you at all reluctant to defend welfare
programs and other social services which are now under attack from the
right wing, and which the right wing wants to dismantle?
Well, it's true that the anarchist vision in just about all its varieties has
looked forward to dismantling state power-and personally I share that vision. But right now it runs directly counter to my goals: my immediate
goals have been, and now very much are, to defend and even strengthen
certain elements of state authority that are now under severe attack. And I
don't think there's any contradiction there-none at all, really.
For example, take the so-called "welfare state." What's called the "welfare state" is essentially a recognition that every child has a right to have
food, and to have health care and so on-and as I've been saying, those programs were set up in the nation-state system after a century of very hard
struggle, by the labor movement, and the socialist movement, and so on.
Well, according to the new spirit of the age, in the case of a fourteen-year-old girl who got raped and has a child, her child has to learn "personal responsibility" by not accepting state welfare handouts, meaning, by not
having enough to eat. Alright, I don't agree with that at any level. In fact, I
think it's grotesque at any level. I think those children should be saved. And
in today's world, that's going to have to involve working through the state
system; it's not the only case.
So despite the anarchist "vision," I think aspects of the state system, like
the one that makes sure children eat, have to be defended-in fact, defended
very vigorously. And given the accelerating effort that's being made these
days to roll back the victories for justice and human rights which have been
won through long and often extremely bitter struggles in the West, in my
opinion the immediate goal of even committed anarchists should be to
defend some state institutions, while helping to pry them open to more
meaningful public participation, and ultimately to dismantle them in a
much more free society.
There are practical problems of tomorrow on which people's lives very
much depend, and while defending these kinds of programs is by no means
the ultimate end we should be pursuing, in my view we still have to face
the problems that are right on the horizon, and which seriously affect
human

Chapter Nine

345

lives. I don't think those things can simply be forgotten because they might
not fit within some radical slogan that reflects a deeper vision of a future
society. The deeper visions should be maintained, they're important-but dismantling the state system is a goal that's a lot farther away, and you want to
deal first with what's at hand and nearby, I think. And in any realistic perspective, the political system, with all its flaws, does have opportunities for
participation by the general population which other existing institutions,
such as corporations, don't have. In fact, that's exactly why the far right
wants to weaken governmental structures-because if you can make sure that
all the key decisions are in the hands of Microsoft and General Electric and
Raytheon, then you don't have to worry anymore about the threat of popular
involvement in policy-making.
So take something that's been happening in recent years: devolution--that is, removing authority from the federal government down to the state
governments. Well, in some circumstances, that would be a democratizing
move which I would be in favor of-it would be a move away from central
authority down to local authority. But that's in abstract circumstances that
don't exist. Right now it'll happen because moving decision-making power
down to the state level in fact means handing it over to private power. See,
huge corporations can influence and dominate the federal government, but
even middle-sized corporations can influence state governments and play
one state's workforce off against another's by threatening to move production elsewhere unless they get better tax breaks and so on. So under the
conditions of existing systems of power, devolution is very antidemocratic; under other systems of much greater equality, devolution could
be highly democratic-but these are questions which really can't be
discussed in isolation from the society as it actually exists.
So I think that it's completely realistic and rational to work within structures to which you are opposed, because by doing so you can help to move
to a situation where then you can challenge those structures.
Let me just give you an analogy. I don't like to have armed police everywhere, I think it's a bad idea. On the other hand, a number of years ago
when I had little kids, there was a rabid raccoon running around our neighborhood biting children. Well, we tried various ways of getting rid of ityou
know, "Have-A-Heart" animal traps, all this kind of stuff-but nothing
worked. So finally we just called the police and had them do it: it was
better than having the kids bitten by a rabid raccoon, right? Is there a
contradiction there? No: in particular circumstances, you sometimes have
to accept and use illegitimate structures.
Well, we happen to have a huge rabid raccoon running around-it's called
corporations. And there is nothing in the society right now that can protect
people from that tyranny, except the federal government. Now, it doesn't
protect them very well, because mostly it's run by the corporations, but still
it does have some limited effect-it can enforce regulatory measures under
public pressure, let's say, it can reduce dangerous toxic waste

-

346

Understanding Power

disposal, it can set minimal standards on health care, and so on. In fact, it
has various things that it can do to improve the situation when there's this
huge rabid raccoon dominating the place. So, fine, I think we ought to get it
to do the things it can do-if you can get rid of the raccoon, great, then let's
dismantle the federal government. But to say, "Okay, let's just get rid of the
federal government as soon as we possibly can," and then let the private
tyrannies take over every thing-I mean, for an anarchist to advocate that is
just outlandish, in my opinion. So I really don't see any contradiction at all
here.
Supporting these aspects of the governmental structures just seems to me ,
to be part of a willingness to face some of the complexities of life for what
they are-and the complexities of life include the fact that there are a lot of
ugly things out there, and if you care about the fact that some kid in down
own Boston is starving, or, that some poor person can't get adequate
medical care, or that somebody's going to pour toxic waste in your
backyard, or anything at all like that, well, then you try to stop it. And
there's only one institution around right now that can stop it. If you just
want to be pure and say, "I'm against power, period," well, okay, say, "I'm
against the federal government. " But that's just to divorce yourself from
any human concerns, in my view. And I don't think that's a reasonable
stance for anarchists or anyone else to take.
Pension Funds and the Law
MAN: Mr. Chomsky, if what I've been told is correct, almost half of publicly-owned stock in the United States is in privately-held pension trusts,
such as union trust funds. I'm wondering, if restrictions like those under
E.R.I.S.A. [the Employee Retirement Income Security Act} can be modified
so that workers could control their own funds, do you think that it would be
possible to support a collaborative or union-based or popularly-based
effort to direct that money towards socially responsible investment-like
away from companies that are breaking unions and so on?
Well, notice that whatever the numbers are, it's huge-but that money is
not in the hands of labor unions, it's in the hands of Goldman Sachs [investment firm]. And in fact, if the government enforced the laws, the
trustees of those pension funds would be in serious trouble right now-because they have violated their legal responsibility to invest those funds in
safe investments. For instance, they are investing your pensions in things
like junk bonds in Mexico-and the people making those investment decisions would be legally liable for that, if we applied our laws, because they
have a trust to invest those funds in secure investments, and they don't do
it. They just do whatever they want with them. Now, they're not going to be
in trouble, because we don't have a real justice system-we only go after
poor

347
people. But they should be, and in fact, I think the labor movement ought to
ask for that now: like, Rubin, the guy who's Secretary of the Treasury, he
should probably be in jail just because of the Mexican economic collapse
alone [in December 1994], which he allowed to happen.3o
But the point is, you could democratize the unions enough so that they
could actually take control of their own resources. And that would be a very
important step. I mean, there's a lot of potential for activism and popularbased efforts there, you're right. And it doesn't have to stop at their own
pensions, you know: what about the factories in which they work? Why
should they be in the hands of private investors? That's not a law of nature.
Why should a corporation have the rights of an individual.31 A corporation is
a public trust: you go back just a century, and governments were taking
away corporate charters because corporations weren't living up to the
"public interest." 32 It's a very recent idea that these totalitarian institutions
should be totally unaccountable.
So, yes, workers ought to have control of their pension funds-but also
everything else too: that is, the society ought to be democratized. And this is
not a particularly radical idea, actually: you go back to the guys who
founded the American Federation of Labor a century ago-the A.F.L. is not a
flaming radical organization-they said, look, working people ought to
control the places where they work, there's no reason why they should be
controlled by some rich guy out there who put some money into it and has
nothing to do with it.33 That's true too, just like it's true of pension funds--and that would be a move towards a democratic society, as was always
understood in fact, until the independent working-class culture was eliminated in the United States. So pension funds are only a part of it: a big part,
but only part.
MAN: What do you think the role of law is generally in the whole scheme of
control?
Well, law is a bit like a printing press-it's kind of neutral, you can make it
do anything. I mean, what lawyers are taught in law school is chicanery:
how to convert words on paper into instruments of power. And depending
where the power is, the law will mean different things.
MAN: So you don't think there's any legal basis for the hegemony of American corporations, especially in the way that the Fourteenth Amendment
was interpreted to consider them individuals, with individual rights?
Well, you know, "legal basis" is a funny notion: what has a legal basis is a
matter of power, not law-like, the Fourteenth Amendment doesn't say
anything about corporations. During the nineteenth century, there was just 1
change in the legal status of corporations-a change which would have
absolutely appalled Adam Smith, or Thomas Jefferson, or any other En-

348

Understanding Power

lightenment thinker. In fact, Smith warned against it, and Jefferson lived
long enough to see the beginnings of it-and what he said is, if what he
called the "banks and moneyed incorporations" got the rights that they in
fact ended up receiving, we would have a form of absolutism worse than
the one we thought we were fighting against in the American Revolution.34
And those rights simply were granted-they weren't granted by Congress,
and in other countries they weren't granted by Parliaments; they were
granted by judges, lawyers, corporate representatives, and others, completely outside the democratic system. And they simply created another
world-they created a world of absolutist power which was very new.35
There's a lot of good work on this by what are called Critical Legal historians, Morton Horwitz at Harvard and others. Also, Oxford University
Press has a book by a historian at the University of California named
Charles Sellers, who discusses some of this: it's called The Market Revolution.36 That's the basic story, though: these laws were made by a big
power-play, completely outside of popular control. Okay, as usual, the guys
with the guns are the ones that decide what the law is.
Conspiracy Theories
MAN: Noam, you mentioned earlier how "conspiracy theories" take up a
lot of energy in the left movements these days, particularly on the West
Coast and with respect to the Kennedy assassination-and you said that in
your view, it's a totally wasted effort. Do you really feel there's nothing at
all worthwhile in that kind of inquiry?
Well, let me put it this way. Every example we find of planning
decisions in the society is a case where some people got together and tried
to use whatever power they could draw upon to achieve a result-if you like,
those are "conspiracies." That means that almost everything that happens in
the world is a "conspiracy." If the Board of Directors of General Motors
gets together and decides what kind of car to produce next year, that's a
conspiracy. Every business decision, every editorial decision is a
conspiracy. If the Linguistics Department I work in decides who to appoint
next year, that's a conspiracy.
Okay, obviously that's not interesting: all decisions involve people. So
the real question is, are there groupings well outside the structures of the
major institutions of the society which go around them, hijack them, undermine them, pursue other courses without an institutional base, and so on
and so forth? And that's a question of fact: do significant things happen
because groups or subgroups are acting in secret outside the main structures
of institutional power?
Well, as I look over history, I don't find much of that. I mean, there are
some cases-for instance, at one point a group of Nazi generals thought of

Chapter Nine

349

assassinating Hitler. Okay, that's a conspiracy. But things like that are real
blips on the screen, as far as I can see. Now, if people want to spend time
studying the group of Nazi generals who decided it was time to get rid of
Hitler, that's a fine topic for a monograph-maybe somebody will write a
thesis about it. But we're not going to learn anything about the world from
it, at least nothing that generalizes to the next case-it's all going to be historically contingent and specific; it'll show you how one particular group of
people acted under particular circumstances. Fine.
And if you look at the place where investigation of "conspiracies" has
absolutely flourished, modern American history, I think what's notable is
the absence of such cases-at least as I read the record, they almost never
happen. I mean, occasionally you'll find something like the Reaganites,
with their off-the-shelf subversive and terrorist activities, but that was sort
of a fringe operation-and in fact, part of the reason why a lot of it got exposed so quickly is because the institutions are simply too powerful to tolerate very much of that stuff. As far as the Pentagon goes, sure, the
Services will push their own interests-but typically they do it in pretty
transparent ways.
Or take the C.I.A., which is considered the source of a lot of these conspiracies: we have a ton of information about it, and as I read the information, the C.I.A. is basically just an obedient branch of the White House. I
mean, sure, the C.I.A. has done things around the world-but as far as we
know, it hasn't done anything on its own. There's very little evidence-in
fact, I don't know of any-that the C.I.A. is some kind of rogue elephant, you
know, off on its own doing things. What the record shows is that the C.I.A.
is just an agency of the White House, which sometimes carries out
operations for which the Executive branch wants what's called "plausible
deniability": in other words, if something goes wrong, we don't want it to
look like we did it, those guys in the C.I.A. did it, and we can throw some
of them to the wolves if we need to.37 That's basically the role of the C.I.A.,
along with mostly just collection of information.
It's the same with the Trilateral Commission, the Council on Foreign Relations, all these other things that people are racing around searching for
conspiracy theories about-they're "nothing" organizations. Of course they're
there, obviously rich people get together and talk to each other, and play
golf with one another, and plan together-that's not a big surprise. But these
conspiracy theories people are putting their energies into have virtually
nothing to do with the way the institutions actually (unction.
The Kennedy-assassination cult is probably the most striking case. I
mean, you have all these people doing super-scholarly intensive research,
and trying to find out just who talked to whom, and what the exact contours
were of this supposed high-level conspiracy-it's all complete nonsense. As
soon as you look into the various theories, they always collapse, there's just
nothing there.38 But in many places, the left has just fallen apart on the basis
of these sheer cults.

350

Understanding Power

MAN: There's perhaps one exception, though-what about Martin Luther
King's assassination?
That's interesting-see, that's the one case where you can imagine pretty
plausible reasons why people would have wanted to kill him, and I would
not be in the least surprised if there in fact was a real conspiracy behind that
one, probably a high-level conspiracy. I mean, the mechanisms were there,
maybe they would have hired somebody from the Mafia or something to do
it-but that conspiracy theory is perfectly plausible, I think. And interestingly, I'm not aware that there's been very much inquiry into it--or if there
has been, I haven't heard about it.39 But in the case of the one that everybody's excited about-Kennedy-I mean, nobody's even come up with a
plausible reason.
In fact, that's a pretty dramatic contrast, isn't it: the case of the King assassination is on its face very plausible, and the case of the Kennedy
assassination is on its face extremely implausible-yet look at the difference
in treatment.
WOMAN: Do you have any ideas why that might be?
Well, there are a lot of things in a way "conspiring" to make the Kennedy assassination an attractive topic these days. I mean, the Kennedy
administration was in many ways very similar to the Reagan administration-in policy and programs-but they did do one smart thing that was
different: they sort of buttered up the intellectual class, as compared with
the Reaganites, who just treated them with contempt. So they gave sort of
an appearance of sharing power (it was never real) to the kinds of people
who write books and articles, and make movies, and all of those things-and the result is, Camelot has always had a very beautiful image. And
somehow it's all succeeded in getting most of the population to believe the
lies about Kennedy. I mean, even today you can go down to poor rural
black areas in the South and find pictures of him on the walls. Kennedy's
role in the Civil Rights Movement was not pretty. But somehow the imagery has succeeded, even if the reality was never there.40
And certainly a lot of things have gone wrong in the last thirty years, for
all sorts of independent reasons. I mean, the Civil Rights Movement made
great achievements, but it never lived up to the hopes that many people invested in it. The anti-war movement made achievements, but it didn't end
war. Real wages have been declining for twenty years.41 People are
working harder, they have to work longer hours, they have less securitythings are just looking bad for a lot of people, especially young people. I
mean, very few people expect the future for their children to be anything
like what they had, and entry-level wages in the United States have just
declined radically in the last fifteen years-for instance, wages you get for
your first job after high school are now down 30 percent for males and 18
percent for females over 1980, and that just kind of changes your picture of
life.42 And one

Chapter Nine

351

could easily go on. But the fact is, a lot of things have happened that aren't
very pretty. And in this kind of situation, it's very easy to fall into the belief
that we had a hero, and we had a wonderful country, and we had this guy
who was going to lead us, we had the messiah-then they shot him down and
ever since then everything's been illegitimate. So really there have to be
serious efforts to get past this, I think.
.
The Decision to get Involved

MAN: Noam, we've been discussing a number of activist strategies and
problems-I'd like to talk for a moment about some of the reasons why
people don't get involved in activism. Suppose somebody convinced you, at
the level of your belief in most things, that it was impossible to change the
country, that the basic institutional structures we have now are going to remain in place for the next 200 years-you know, more or less adapted, but
the same basic structures. I'm wondering, would you behave any differently?
Zero.
MAN: You would behave exactly the same way?
Same way. In fact, you don't even have to make it hypothetical-when I
first got seriously involved in anti-Vietnam War activity, I was a hundred
percent convinced that absolutely nothing could be done. I mean, into 1965
and '66, if we wanted to have an anti-war meeting in Boston, we'd have to
find six topics-you know, "Let's talk about Venezuela, Iran, Vietnam, and
the price of bread, and maybe we can get an audience that'll outnumber the
organizers." And that went on for a long time. It looked impossible.
MAN: So if you thought that the current situation was going to continue,
just persist forever, you would still do it?
Yes.
MAN: Why, exactly?
Well, for a number of quite simple reasons. For one thing, if somebody
convinced me of that, it would be because I'm totally irrational-there's no
way to convince anybody of such things rationally. Look, we cannot predict the weather two weeks ahead, and that's something relatively simple,
it's not like human society.
MAN: It's a hypothetical question, it gets to motivations-I'm sure none of us
believe it, none of us believe you could prove it ...

\

352

Understanding Power

Not only could you not prove it, you couldn't even say anything convincing about it.
MAN: But, nevertheless, because in fact a great many people not understanding that point do feel this way, or tend to feel this way sometimes, and
get depressed at those moments-what I'm wondering is, anyway, in
any event, what gets you up each morning to do the things you do? Is it that
you think in terms of winning a little way down the road, or is it something
else?
Well, it's hard to introspect, but to the extent that I introspect about it,
it's because you basically have two choices. One choice is to assume the
worst, and then you can be guaranteed that it'll happen. The other is to
assume that there's some hope for change, in which case it's possible that
you can help to effect change. So you've got two choices, one guarantees
the worst will happen, the other leaves open the possibility that things
might get better. Given those choices, a decent person doesn't hesitate.
MAN: But is it really true that a decent person will only go that one way?
I'm remembering a friend of mine who was an activist in the Sixties and intended to move into a working-class neighborhood to do organizing, and
finally he decided not to. Somewhat later he went back to graduate school
and became a psychiatrist, and now I'm sure he has progressive values, but
he's certainly not involved in any significant way in political activity. But
the choice he made back then was a very conscious one: he looked around
and said, "The impact that I personally am going to have is so small, because I'm not So-and-so and So-and-so, that I feel it's just not worth giving
up what I think I'll be giving up."
I know plenty of people like that too. But see, that person now, let's say
he's a rich psychiatrist somewhere-okay, he's got a lot of options, he's simply deciding at some point not to face them. They're always there. For example, he's got money: if he doesn't want to do things himself, he can give
money to people who do. In fact, movement groups have existed because
people who were doing other things were willing to fund them-something
as trivial as that. And you can go way beyond that, of course, and still live
your elegant lifestyle and do the work you want to do. I know plenty of
people who have in fact divided their lives that way.
Now, of course, it's extremely easy to say, "The heck with it-I'm just
going to adapt myself to the structures of power and authority, and do the
best I can within them." Sure, you can do that. But that's not acting like a
decent person. Look, if you're walking down the street and you see a kid
eating an ice-cream cone, and you notice there's no cop around and you're
hungry, you can take the ice-cream cone because you're bigger and just
walk away. You can do that-probably there are people who do. But we

Chapter Nine

353

call them pathological. On the other hand, if they do it within existing social structures, we call them normal-but it's just as pathological, it's just the
pathology of the general society.
Again, people always have choices, so you can decide to accept the
pathology-but then do it honestly at least. If you have that grain of honesty
in you, say: "Okay, I'm going to honestly be pathological." Or else just try
to break out of it somehow.
MAN: For a lot of people, though, it appears that there's an all-or-nothing
choice-it appears that there's the choice between being "normal," pathological as you describe, but a normal member of society with its normal
benefits and costs, having a reasonably average or perhaps elite existence,
one that's accepted. And then there seems to be the "all" choice. I think the
reason why it's so hard for people even just to take a leaflet, or to give a
donation at a relatively low level which means nothing to them financiallywhich is less money than they're going to spend on dinner Friday night
when they go out-seems to me to be because there is this psychologically
very powerful effect. At some level people know that it's right, but they also
know that to do it somewhat leads to doing it more-so they just close the
door right at the very beginning. I'm not sure how as organizers we can
manage to overcome that situation.
I think you're right that just giving your contribution of a hundred dollars
to the Central America Support Center or whatever is a statement that you
know that that's the right thing to do-and then once you've stated that it's
the right thing to do, the question arises, "How come I'm only doing this
when I could be doing a million times more?" And it's very easy just to say,
"Look, I'm not going to face that problem, I'm just going to forget it all."
But that's like stealing the ice-cream cone from the kid.
The reality is that there's a whole range of choices in the middle, and all
of us have made them-none of us are saints, at least I'm not. I haven't given
up my house, I haven't given up my car, I don't live in a hovel, I don't spend
24 hours a day working for the benefit of the human race, or anything like
that. In fact, I don't even come close: I spend an awful lot of my time and
energy just doing scientific work.
MAN: And you don't feel guilty about that.
Well, that's not so clear. But I certainly do devote an awful lot of my energy and activity to things that I just enjoy, like scientific work. I just like
it, I do it out of pleasure. And everybody else I know does the same thing.
MAN: Do you fool yourself into believing that it increases your effectiveness as a political person somehow?

354

\

Understanding Power
No, that's ridiculous-it has no effect on that. And I certainly don't do it
for that reason. I do it because I like it, and I think it's getting somewhere.
Look, you're not going to be effective as a political activist unless you
have a satisfying life. I mean, there may be people who are really saints, but
I've never heard of one. Like, it may be that the political activities themselves are so gratifying that they're all you want to do, and you just throw \ yourself
into them. Okay, that's a perfectly fine thing to be-it's just that f. ..... ,;~'1;' most people
have other interests: they want to listen to music, they want to , take a walk by the
ocean, they want to watch the sunset. Any human being is too rich and complex just
to be satisfied with these things, so you have to hit some kind of a balance.
Well, the choices are all there, but I think you've identified precisely
why it's psychologically difficult for people to recognize that-because once
you've recognized that the choices are there, you're always going to be
faced with the question, why am I not doing more? But that's just the reality
of life: if you're honest, you're always going to be faced with that question.
And there are plenty of things to do, and also plenty of successes to point
to. In
fact, it's amazing how many successes there have been, if you really think
about it.
For example, take the issue of East Timor, a big massacre. At the time
that I got involved in that over a decade ago, nobody even wanted to hear about itbut after years of organizing by some pretty tireless activists,
things finally got to the point where the U.S. Congress barred military aid
to Indonesia. That's a tremendous change-you could save hundreds of
thousands of lives that way. How many people can look back and say,
"Look, I helped to save hundreds of thousands of lives"? And that's one tiny
issue. So all of it was going on in secret, nobody was interested, everybody
in power wanted to let it go on-but half a dozen or so people finally
managed to break through.
MAN: I'm inclined to think that most of the people who are involved in that
effort, instead of feeling elated, or at least feeling a degree of satisfaction
over the accomplishment, rather view it as a horrendously long campaign
with very little achieved over the years.
Suppose you're on your deathbed: how many people can look back and
say, "I've contributed to helping one person not get killed"?
MAN: I'm not disagreeing with you-but there's just something about our
culture that causes people on the left not to see the successes.
See, I'm not so convinced of this. If you go back to the 1960s movements, when a lot of the current ferment started, the people involved overwhelmingly were young people-and young people have a notoriously short
perspective. That's part of being twenty years old: you're thinking

Chapter Nine

355

about what's going to happen tomorrow, not what life is going to be like
twenty years from now.
So look at something like the Columbia strike, which was the big thing
in 1968 [hundreds of students took over Columbia University buildings for
eight days to protest war-related research and the school's relations with the
surrounding community]. If you remember what it was like back then,
you'll recall that the sense on the Columbia campus-quite literally, I'm not
exaggerating-was: "If we close down Columbia and have fun smoking pot
for three weeks, the revolution will be here, and then it'll all be over and
everybody will be happy and equal and free, and we can go back to our
ordinary concerns." Well, you waited three weeks, the cops came in and
smashed you up, and nothing changed. And there were a lot of results from
that. One result was just that a lot of people gave up, said, "Well, we
couldn't do it." In fact, it's rather striking that '68 around the world is considered a crucially important date-but it was really the end.
So the fact that it was dominantly a youth movement in the Sixties had
good and bad aspects, and one bad aspect was this sense that if you don't
achieve quickly, you'd might as well quit. But of course, that's not the way
changes come. The struggle against slavery went on forever, the struggle
for women's rights has been going on for centuries, the effort to overcome
"wage slavery"-that's been going on since the beginnings of the industrial
revolution, we haven't advanced an inch. In fact, we're worse off than we
were a hundred years ago in terms of understanding the issues. Well, okay,
you just keep struggling.
IIHuman Nature Is Corrupt"
MAN: Noam, another view I frequently encounter lying behind people's
reticence to become involved in political activity stems from the idea that
human nature is corrupt: egotistical, self-centered, anti-social, and so onand that as a result, society will always have oppressors and oppressed, be
hierarchical, exploit people, be driven by individual self-interest, etc. I
often find that you can get agreement on the inhumanity of the system, or
on the injustice of a war, or on some specific set of policies, but that people
will refrain from becoming active about it because of a sense of hopelessness having to do with this view of human nature. Again, it may just be an
excuse, a last line of defense against getting involved-but in order to deal
with it as an organizer, you still have to address the claim. I'm curious
what you would say to someone like that.
Well, there's a sense in which the claim is certainly true. First of all,
human nature is something we don't know much about: doubtless there is a
rich and complex human nature, and doubtless it's largely genetically
determined, like everything else-but we don't know what it is. However,

356

Understanding Power

there is enough evidence from history and experience to demonstrate that
human nature is entirely consistent with everything you mentionedin fact,
by definition it has to be. So we know that human nature, and that includes
our nature, yours and mine, can very easily turn people into quite efficient
torturers and mass-murderers and slave-drivers. We know thatyou don't
have to look very far for evidence. But what does that mean? Should people
therefore not try to stop torture? If you see somebody beating a child to
death, should you say, "Well, you know, that's human nature" -which it is
in fact: there certainly are conditions under which people will act like that.
To the extent that the statement is true, and there is such an extent, it's
just not relevant: human nature also has the capacity to lead to selflessness,
and cooperation, and sacrifice, and support, and solidarity, and tremendous
courage, and lots of other things too.
I mean, my general feeling is that over time, there's measurable
progress-it's not huge, but it's significant. And sometimes it's been pretty
dramatic. Over history, there's been a real widening of the moral realm, I
think-a recognition of broader and broader domains of individuals who are
regarded as moral agents, meaning having rights. Look, we are selfconscious beings, we're not rocks, and we can come to get a better understanding of our own nature, it can become more and more realized over
time-not because you read a book about it, the book doesn't have anything
to tell you, because nobody really knows anything about this topic. But just
through experience-including historical experience, which is part of our
personal experience because it's embedded in the culture we enter into-we
can gain greater understanding of our nature and values.
Discovering Morality
Take the treatment of children, for example. In the medieval period, it
was considered quite legitimate to either kill them, or throw them out, or
treat them brutally, all sorts of things. It still happens of course, but now it's
regarded as pathological, not proper. Well, it's not that we have a different
moral capacity than people did in the Middle Ages, it's just that the situation's changed: there are opportunities to think about things that weren't
available in a society that had a lower material production level and so on.
So we've just learned more about our own moral sense in that area.
I think it's part of moral progress to be able to face things that once
looked as if they weren't problems. I have that kind of feeling about our relation to animals, for example-I think the questions there are hard, in fact.
A lot of these things are matters of trying to explore your own moral intuitions, and if you've never explored them, you don't know what they are.
Abortion's a similar case-there are complicated moral issues. Feminist issues were a similar case. Slavery was a similar case. I mean, some of these
things seem easy now, because we've solved them and there's a kind of

Chapter Nine

357

shared consensus-but I think it's a very good thing that people are asking
questions these days about, say, animal rights. I think there are serious
questions there. Like, to what extent do we have a right to experiment on
and torture animals? I mean, yes, you want to do animal experimentation
for the prevention of diseases. But what's the balance, where's the tradeoff?
There's obviously got to be some. Like, we'd all agree that too much torture
of animals for treating a disease would not be permissible. But what are the
principles on which we draw such conclusions? That's not a trivial
question.
MAN: What about eating?
Same question.
MAN: Are you a vegetarian?
I'm not, but I think it's a serious question. If you want my guess, my
guess is that if society continues to develop without catastrophe on something like the course you can see over time, I wouldn't in the least be surprised if it moves in the direction of vegetarianism and the protection of
animal rights.
Look, doubtless there's plenty of hypocrisy and confusion and
everything else about the question right now, but that doesn't mean that the
issue isn't valid. And I think one can see the moral force to it-definitely one
should keep an open mind on it, it's certainly a perfectly intelligible idea to
us.
I mean, you don't have to go back very far in history to find gratuitous
torture of animals. So in Cartesian philosophy, they thought they'd proven
that humans had minds and everything else in the world was a machine--so
there's no difference between a cat and a watch, let's say, just the cat's a
little more complicated. And if you look back at the French Court in the
seventeenth century, courtiers-you know, big smart guys who'd studied all
this stuff and thought they understood it-would as a sport take Lady SoAnd-So's favorite dog and kick it and beat it to death, and laugh, saying,
"Ha, ha, look, this silly lady doesn't understand the latest philosophy, which
shows that it's just like dropping a rock on the floor." That was gratuitous
torture of animals, and it was regarded as if it were the torturing of a rock:
you can't do it, there's no way to torture a rock. Well, the moral sphere has
certainly changed in that respect-gratuitous torture of animals is no longer
considered quite legitimate.
MAN: But in that case it could be that what's changed is our understanding
of what an animal is, not the understanding of our underlying values.
In that case it probably was-because in fact the Cartesian view was a
departure from the traditional view, in which you didn't torture animals

358

Understanding Power

gratuitously. On the other hand, there are cultures, like say, aristocratic cultures, that have fox-hunting as a sport, or bear-baiting, or other things like
that, in which gratuitous torture of animals has been seen as perfectly legitimate.
In fact, it's kind of intriguing to see how we regard this. Take cockfighting, for example, in which cocks are trained to tear each other to
shreds. Our culture happens to regard that as barbaric; on the other hand,
we train humans to tear each other to shreds-they're called boxing matchesand that's not regarded as barbaric. So there are things that we don't permit
of cocks that we permit of poor people. Well, you know, there are some
funny values at work there.
Abortion
MAN: You mentioned abortion-what's your view about that whole debate?
I think it's a hard one, I don't think the answers are simple-it's a case
where there really are conflicting values. See, it's very rare in most human
situations that there's a clear and simple answer about what's right, and
sometimes the answers are very murky, because there are different values,
and values do conflict. I mean, our understanding of our own moral value
system is that it's not like an axiom system, where there's always one answer and not some other answer. Rather we have what appear to be conflicting values, which often lead us to different answers-maybe because we
don't understand all the values well enough yet, or maybe because they really are in conflict. Well, in the case of abortion, there are just straight conflicts. From one point of view, a child up to a certain point is an organ of
the mother's body, and the mother ought to have a decision what to do-and
that's true. From another point of view, the organism is a potential human
being, and it has rights. And those two values are simply in conflict.
On the other hand, a biologist I know once suggested that we may one
day be able to see the same conflict when a woman washes her hands. I
mean, when a woman washes her hands, a lot of cells flake off-and in
principle, each of those cells has the genetic instructions for a human being.
Well, you could imagine a future technology which would take one of
those cells and create a human being from it. Now, obviously he was
making the argument as a reductio ad absurdum argument, but there's an
element of truth to it-not that much yet, but it's not like saying something
about astrology. What he's saying is true.
If you want to know my own personal judgment, I would say a reasonable proposal at this point is that the fetus changes from an organ to a person when it becomes viable-but certainly that's arguable. And besides, as
this biologist was pointing out, it's not very clear when that is-depending

Chapter Nine

359

on the state of technology, it could be when the woman's washing her
hands. That's life, though: in life you're faced with hard decisions, conflicting values.
Moral Values
MAN: Where do you think "values" come from in the first place?
That's an interesting question. Any answer we give is based on
extremely little understanding, so nothing one says is very serious. But just
from the conditions of moral judgment, I don't see how it can fail to be true
that moral values are basically rooted in our nature-I think that must be
true. And the reason why I say that is pretty elementary.
I mean, undoubtedly the way in which we look at things and make judgments about them and assess them has a significant and notable cultural
factor. But that aside, we certainly are capable, and everybody does it, of
making moral judgments and evaluations in entirely new situations-we do
that all the time; we may not be consciously evaluating all the new circumstances we're faced with, but we're certainly at least tacitly doing it, and
the results of those evaluations are the basis for our choices of action, our
doing one thing and not another. So we're constantly making all kinds of
judgments, including moral judgments, aesthetic judgments, and all sorts of
others, about new things and new situations. Well, either it's being done just
randomly, sort of like pulling something out of a hat-which certainly
doesn't seem to be true, either introspectively or by observation-or else
we're doing it on the basis of some moral system that we have built into our
minds somehow, which gives answers, or at least partial answers, to a
whole range of new situations.
Well, nobody knows what that system actually is of course-we don't
understand it at all-but it does seem to be rich and complex enough so that
it can apply to indefinitely many new situations.
MAN: Obviously one couldn't map it out in detail, but how do you think
such a system might be set up?
Well, again, we really don't know at all. But a serious proposal for such a
system, I think, would be that it might be something like what we know
about language-and a lot is known. For example, there is a framework of
basic, fundamental principles of language that are invariant in the species,
they're just fixed in our biological nature somehow-they hold for all languages, and they allow for only a very limited degree of modification,
which comes from early experience. Then as soon as those wired-in options
for variation are fixed, children have a whole linguistic system which allows them to say new things, and to understand new things, and to inter-

360

Understanding Power

pret new expressions that nobody's ever heard before-all kinds of things
like that.
Well, qualitatively speaking, that's what our system of moral judgment
looks like, so it's conceivable that it has a similar kind of basis-but again,
you have to find the answer, you can't just guess.
MAN: Obviously the underlying principles can't be simple-they can't just
be something like, "Thou shalt not kill. "
No-because we decide much more complex things than that. I mean, we
really don't know what the fundamental principles of moral judgment
actually are, but we have very good reason to believe that they're there.
And that's simply because we can, in fact, make relatively consistent moral
judgments, judgments which are understood by other people, and
appreciated by them (sometimes with disagreement, in which case we can
have moral discourse), and we can do all of that under new conditions that
we've never seen before, and facing new problems and so on. Okay, unless
we're angels, the structures that perform those functions got into the organism the same way other complex things did-namely, they're largely part
of a genetically-determined framework, which gets marginally modified
through the course probably of early experience.
Well, that's what our moral system might look like. How much variation
can there be in such moral systems? Well, without understanding, we don't
know. How much variation can there be in languages? Without understanding, we don't know. I mean, in the case of languages, we know that it's
not much variation, and in the case of moral values I think we can make a
fair guess that it also can't be much variation-and the reason is quite elementary. Our moral system appears to be complex and determinate, and
there are only two factors that can enter into determining it: one is our fixed
biological nature, and the other is individual experience. Well, we know
that experience is extremely impoverished, it doesn't give a lot of directionthe logic being pretty much the same as when someone asks, "Why do
children undergo puberty at a certain age?" Actually, nobody knows the
answer to that: it's a topic that's unknown. But there are only two possible
factors that can enter into it. One is something in children's pre-puberty
experience which sort of sets them off undergoing puberty-say, some effect
of the environment such as peer pressure, or somebody told you it would be
a good idea or something. And the other is that we're just genetically
designed so that under certain conditions and at a certain level of maturation, hormones take over, and at that point we undergo puberty: it's
wired in.
Well, without knowing anything, everyone just assumes the second possibility. Like, if somebody came along and said they think it's peer pressure
that causes puberty-it's because you see other people doing it, and you want
to be like them-without knowing anything, you'd just laugh. And

the reason you'd laugh is very simple: the environment is not specific
or rich enough to determine these highly specific changes that take place.
And that logic also holds for just about everything else in growth and
development too-that's why people assume, without knowledge, that an
embryo will become a chicken rather than a human being depending on its
biological nature, not depending on the nutrition that's fed in: because the
nutrition doesn't have enough information to cause those highly specific
changes. Well, it looks as if moral values and our moral judgment system
are of that character too.
Actually, contributing to this conclusion is just the fact that we can have
moral discourse to begin with. So take an issue on which people were really
split, take slavery. It wasn't just an intellectual debate, obviously-there was a
huge amount of struggle involved-but insofar as there was an intellectual
debate, it had a certain shared moral ground to it. In fact, the slave owners'
arguments are not so simple to answer-some of them are valid, and have a
lot of implications. They were taken very seriously by American workers in
the late nineteenth century, for example.
For instance, the slave owners argued, "You take better care of a slave if
you own it than if you rent it." Like, you take better care of your car if you
own it than if you rent it, so you take better care of your worker if you own
it than if you rent it-so slavery's benevolent and "free market" is morally
atrocious. And the slave owners in fact said, "Look, we're a lot more
benevolent than you guys with your capitalist wage-slave system." And if
you look back at the literature by workers who organized into, say, the
Knights of Labor and other working-class organizations of the late nineteenth century, you'll also see a strain running through their position which
said: "We fought to end slavery, not to impose it" [i.e. the industrial wagelabor system became dominant after the Civil War].43 So the point is, on all
sides of debates like these, people understand that they have to appeal to the
same basic moral principles, even if what they're doing is totally venal.
I mean, it's extremely rare even for an S.S. guard or a torturer to say, "I'm
doing this because I like to be a son of a bitch." We all do bad things in our
lives, and if you think back, it's very rare that you've said, "I'm doing this
just because I feel like it" -people reinterpret things in order to fit them into
a basic framework of moral values, which in fact we all share.
Now, I don't want to suggest that moral values are uniform-if you look
across cultures, you do find some differences. But when you look at different languages, you also appear to find radical differences. You know they
can't be there-because if the differences really were great, it would be impossible to acquire any of the languages. So therefore the differences have
be superficial, and the scientific question is to prove what must be true by e
basic logic of the situation. Well, I think the same must be true in the ie of
moral judgment as well. So to go back to the original question, I don't think
we can reasonably doubt that moral values are indeed rooted in nature.

362

Understanding Power

MAN: Then if people do have this shared set of moral values, you still have
to explain why everything is as corrupt and hierarchical and war-laden as
it is.
But why not ask another question? Why not ask how come there's so
much sympathy, and care, and love, and solidarity? I mean, that's also true.
MAN: That's the way I always answer the objection-there should be none
of those things, because the institutions don't breed them.
Well, there's no such thing as, "why is there so much of this and so much
of that?" -there is what there is. But what there is doubtless is conditioned
by the opportunities and choices that are imposed and available to people
under particular social, cultural, economic, and even physical settings. So
the point is to try to get to a situation where the society and all its
institutions and arrangements are set up so as to maximize the options for
people to pursue the healthier alternatives. And I really don't think there's
been a better period in modern history for organizing towards that than there
is right now, actually.
I mean, there's tremendous disillusionment all across the country-and it's
world-wide incidentally: there have been cross-national studies of this, and
the level of pessimism across the entire industrial world is just extraordinary. In the United States, for example, about three-quarters of the population thinks that the future is going to be "objectively worse" than the pastin other words, that their children won't live like they do.44 About half the
American population thinks that both political parties just ought to be
disbanded, they're useless.45 The disaffection from institutions is always
high, and it's been going up very consistently in past years.46 These are conditions under which organizing for social change ought to be very much
possible-if we're not doing it, it's our own fault: these factors have not been
true in the past.
But at the same time, it's also true that people feel hopeless. I mean, part
of the disillusionment is that they just don't see anything else-they don't see
a solution, or any alternatives. Even at the depths of the 1930s Depression,
which was objectively much worse than today, people were never hopeless
the way they are today. Most people felt it's going to get better, we can do
something about it, we can organize, we can work. I mean, they had
illusions too, like there were a lot of illusions about Roosevelt, for examplebut the illusions were combined with something real going on. Today what
people mainly feel is, it's going to get worse, and there's nothing we can do
about it.
So what we're faced with is a combination of a very high degree of disillusionment, and a very low degree of hope and perception of alternatives.
And that's exactly where serious organizers ought to be able to step in.

10

Turning Point
Based on discussions in Illinois, New Jersey, Massachusetts, New
York, and Maryland in 1994 to 1996 and 1999.

Bringing the Third World Home
WOMAN: What would have to happen for people to be able to do more of
the real work of society-like supporting each other and educating childreninstead of just spending our whole lives working at lame jobs for
corporations?
Actually, a lot of countries tend to emphasize those things, even todaywe
don't have to look very far for models. For example, take Western Europe:
those are societies not very different from ours, they have the same
corporate-run economy, the same sort of limited political system, but they
just happen to pursue somewhat different social policies, for various historical reasons. So Germany has a kind of social contract we don't have-one of
the biggest unions there just won a 35-hour work-week, for example.! In the
Netherlands, poverty among the elderly has gone down to flat zero, and
among children it's 4 percent, almost nothing.2 In Sweden, mothers and fathers both get substantial parental leave to take care of their children, like a
year or something-because taking care of children is considered something
that has value in that society, unlike in the United States, where the leadership elements hate families.3 I mean, Newt Gingrich and the rest of these
people may talk about supporting "family values," but they actually want
families destroyed-because families are not rational from the point of
view ,f profit-making.
So even within the range of existing societies set up almost exactly like Irs,
there are plenty of other social policies you could have-and I think r
system could tolerate those things too, it really just depends if there's )ugh
pressure to achieve them.
Actually, you might want to take a look at an interesting volume pub36
3

364

Understanding Power

lished recently by U.N.I.C.E.F. [the United Nations Children's Fund], about
treatment of children in the rich countries-it's yet to be reviewed in the New
York Times, or anywhere else in the United States, but it's really quite
revealing. It was written by a very good American economist named Sylvia
Ann Hewlett, and she identifies two basic patterns of treatment, a
"Continental-European/Japanese" model and an "Anglo-American" modelwhich just are radically different. Her conclusion is, the ContinentalEuropean/Japanese pattern has improved the status of children and
families; the Anglo-American pattern has been what she calls "a war"
against children and families. And that's particularly been true in the last
twenty years, because the so-called "conservatives" who took over in the
1980s, aside from their love of torture and misery abroad, also happen to be
passionately opposed to family values and the rights of children, and have
carried out social policies which have destroyed them.4
Well, that's just the wrong story for the New York Times-so that study
never gets reviewed. Instead what the Times editors devote the cover-story
of their Book Review to is another extremely deep problem the United
States is facing-in case you aren't aware of it, you'd really better read this.
We're facing the problem that "bad genes" are taking over the United
States-and part of the proof of that is that scores on S.A.T.s and I.Q. tests
have been steadily declining in recent years, children just aren't doing as
well as they used to.
Well, somebody who's really unsophisticated might think that the problem could have something to do with social policies that have driven 40
percent of the children in New York City below the poverty line, for example-but that issue never arises for the New York Times.5 Instead the problem
is bad genes. The problem is that blacks, who evolved in Africa, evolved in
kind of a hostile climate, so therefore they evolved in such a way that black
mothers don't nurture their children-and also they breed a lot, they all breed
like rabbits. And the effect is, the gene pool in the United States is being
contaminated, and now it's starting to show up in standardized test scores.6
This is real hard science.
The Times's review starts off by saying, well, maybe the facts in these
books aren't quite right, but nonetheless, one thing is clear: these are serious issues, and any democratic society which ignores them does so "at its
peril." 7 On the other hand, a society doesn't ignore "at its peril" social
policies that are depriving 40 percent of the children in New York City of
the minimal material conditions which would offer them any hope of ever
escaping the misery, destitution and violence that surround them, and
which have driven them down to levels of malnutrition, disease and suffering where you can predict perfectly well what their scores are going to be
on the "I.Q." tests you give them-none of that you even mention.
In fact, according to the last statistics I saw about this, 30 million people
in the United States are suffering hunger. 30 million is a lot of people, you

Chapter Ten

365

know, and that means plenty of children.8 In the 1980s, hunger declined in
general throughout the entire world, with two exceptions: sub-Saharan
Africa and the United States-the poorest part of the world and the richest
part of the world, there hunger increased. And as a matter of fact, between
1985 and 1990, hunger in the United States increased by 50 percent took a
couple years for the Reagan "reforms" to start taking hold, but by 1985 they
were beginning to have their effects.9 And there is just overwhelming
evidence, in case it's not obvious from common sense, what the effects of
this kind of deprivation are on children-physically, emotionally, and
mentally. For one thing, it's well known that neural development simply is
reduced by low levels of nutrition, and lack of nurturance in general. So
when kids suffer malnutrition, it has permanent effects on them, it has a
permanent effect on their health and lives and minds-they never get over it.
to
And the growing hunger here isn't just among children-it's also been increasing among the elderly, to name one group. So as the Wall Street Journal recently pointed out in a front-page story, hunger is "surging" among
the elderly: about five million older Americans, about 16 percent of the
population over 60, are going hungry, they're malnourished, many of them
are literally starving to death.ll Now, in the United States we don't have
starvation the way they do in Haiti or Nicaragua or something-but the
deprivation is still very real. In many places it's probably worse than it is in
Cuba, say, under the embargo.
So just take Boston, for example, where I live-which is a very rich city,
and also maybe the world's leading medical center. There are some very
fancy hospitals there, but there's also a City Hospital, which serves the rest
of the population. Well, that hospital, which is not a bad hospital I should
say, established a malnutrition clinic a few years ago-because after the impact of the Reaganite economic policies began to be felt, they were starting
to find Third World levels of malnutrition in Boston. And it gets worse over
the winter, because then families have to make the choice: do you let your
kids starve, or do you let them die of the cold? Okay? That's in one of the
richest cities in the world, a major medical center. That's just criminal in a
country as rich as this-or anywhere, for that matter. 12
And it's not just hunger: it turns out that contact time between parents
and children has declined by about 40 percent in the United States since the
1960s-that means that on average, parents and children have to spend about
10 or 12 hours less time together a week.13 Alright, the effects of that also
are obvious: it means television as supervision, latch-key kids, more violence by children and against children, drug abuse-it's all perfectly predictable. And this is mostly the result of the fact that today, both parents in
a family have to put in 50- or 60-hour work-weeks, with no child-support
system around to help them (unlike in other countries), just to make ends
meet.14 And remember, this is in the 1990s, a period when, as Fortune magazine just pointed out, corporate profits are at a record high, and the per-

366

Understanding Power

centage of corporate income going into payrolls is near a record lowthat's
the context in which all of this has been happening.15
Well, none of these things are discussed in the New York Times Book
Review article either. They are discussed in the U.N.I.C.E.F. book I mentioned, but the Times chose not to review that one.
So to return to your question, you ask: what would have to happen for us
to get social policies different from all of these? I don't think there's any
reason why the "Anglo-American model" Hewlett identifies has to
continue--and be extended by things like the Contract With America [a
Republican Congressional policy platform launched in 1994] and the
Welfare Reform Act [the "Federal Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act," which President Clinton signed in August
1996]. These aren't laws of nature, after all; they're social-policy decisionsthey can be made differently. There's a lot of space for changing these
things, even in a society with the same corporate control as ours.
But why not ask another question. Why not ask why absolutist organizations have any right to exist in the first place? I mean, why should a corporation-technically a fascist organization of enormous power-have any
right to tell you what kind of work you're going to do? Why is that any better than having a king tell you what kind of work you're going to do? People fought against that and overthrew it, and we can fight against it again
and overthrow it.
There's plenty of challenging, gratifying, interesting, productive work
around for people to do, and there are plenty of people who want to do itthey simply aren't being allowed that opportunity under the current economic system. Of course, there's also plenty of junky work that has to get
done too-but in a reasonable society, that work would just be distributed
equally among everybody capable of doing it. If you can't get robots to do
it, fine, then you just distribute it equally.16
Okay, I think that's the kind of model we have to try to work towards
now-and frankly, I don't see any reason why that's an impossible goal.
WOMAN: Mr. Chomsky, I just wanted to say that I saw the New York
Times review you were discussing, and I was absolutely appalled by it. If I
was a black man in this country, I wouldn't know what to do with myself--it
would just be a burning fire inside, I would feel such rage.
How about if you were a black woman? That article took seriously the
idea that black women don't nurture their children-because they evolved in
Africa, where the environment was such-and-such. It was pure racism,
something straight out of the Nazis.
But look: it's really not even worth talking about it. The right way to respond is just to ask, what are they doing it for? And they're doing it for a
very simple reason. 30 million people in the country go hungry. 40 percent
of the children in New York City, most of them black and Hispanic, live

Chapter Ten

367

below the poverty line-which means they're destroyed, okay? And that is
the result of very definite social policies that these people are supporting.
Well, you want to keep making all your money, but you don't want to face
any of the rest of it, so you need some kind of a cover. And what's the
cover? "Bad genes." Okay, once you understand what's really motivating
all of this, then at least you're in a position to deal with it.
The point is, just as itwas proper at some point for the Nazis to say,
"Jews are a virus that's destroying our society," it is now proper for the
New York Times to run articles taking seriously the idea that black mothers
don't nurture their children, and for the mainstream intellectual culture to
pretend that these farcical books on I.Q. have any kind of scientific
legitimacy.17
But these are such transparent ideological weapons we shouldn't even
waste our time arguing about them. We should just understand them transparently for what they are: the product of a real commissar culture that is
dedicated to obscuring the most elementary truths about the world, and
rich, powerful people trying to justify the fact that they are pursuing social
policies which are forcing children to die. It's understandable why nobody
would want to face that-but it's also clear how we can change it.
Welfare: the Pea and the Mountain
WOMAN: You mentioned the "Contract With America" and the "Welfare
Reform Act" [which replaced the Aid for Families With Dependent Children program, ending receipt of public assistance benefits by families that
include an adult who has received welfare for five years, and requiring all
"able-bodied" adult recipients to secure a job within two years]. I'm wondering, how do you explain the surge to the right in Washington over the
past several years, beginning with the Republicans' big Congressional triumph in 1994? And what do you think is the real point of these new programs?
Well, let me just begin with the 1994 elections, and the so-called "Contract With America." You're right that in the media that whole election was
called a "landslide for conservatism" and a "political earthquake" and so
on-but you really have to look at that kind of rhetoric a lot more carefully.
There was an interesting fact about the Republicans' agenda, the so-called
"Contract With America" -that is, only a very small number of voters even
knew what it was, and when people were asked about most of its specific
provisions, big majorities opposed it. So there was never really a vote on it,
nobody knew what it was. And even after months of intensive and unremitting propaganda about it, less than half of the U.S. population said
they had even heard of the Contract With America.18 And it wasn't hidden,
it was in the headlines every day. That's the" landslide for conservatism."
And that's just a way of saying that democracy has collapsed.

368

Understanding Power

As far as what it's been about, that couldn't be more obvious: it's standard free-market doctrine-huge state-subsidies for the rich, cut out everything for the poor. Very brazen. So just take a look at some of the specific
provisions. For example, they had one section in the "Contract" called the
"Job Creation and Wage Enhancement Act"-the things under it were,
subsidies to business, tax cuts to business, and then there was one little line
at the bottom which said that the "program to increase wages and create
jobs" will be to eliminate "unfunded mandates," which are one of the main
mechanisms to ensure that States do things like provide social programs,
set regulatory standards, and so on [i.e. the "mandates" are imposed on state
and local governments by Congress].19 Okay, that's the program to "raise
wages and create jobs"-and that's kind of like a symbol for the whole thing.
The main target that they've gone after, both Clinton and Congress, is
what's called "welfare"-meaning that tiny component of welfare that goes
to poorer people, which is approximately the size of a pea on a mountain.
Meanwhile, they continue to enhance the real welfare-that is, the mountain
of welfare that goes to richer people. And they're continuing to enhance it
in the traditional two ways: first, by straight handouts to business; and
second, through regressive fiscal measures [i.e. ones having a greater
adverse impact on those with less money].
So first take the straight handouts part, which is the bulk of welfare. The
straight handouts part is things like military spending, for example. Now,
the United States isn't defending itself from anybody-that's not even a joke.
We have almost half the military spending in the world, and who's attacking us?20 The United States hasn't been attacked since the War of 1812there is no country in the world that has as limited security threats as we do.
21
But we are defending rich people, that's true-the rich are defending
themselves against the poor and the poor are paying for it, so for that, it's
true, you have to keep increasing military spending. In fact, that's the main
reason we have the Pentagon system in the first place: it's a vehicle to
channel hundreds of billions of taxpayer dollars to the wealthy, through
military contracts and technology research and so on.
Look, the Pentagon's never really been about defense: the Pentagon is
about the fact that rich people can have their own computers, after decades
of development paid for by the public through the state-sector-and it's about
the fact that I.B.M. and other private corporations and investors are making
huge profits off them. Or it's about the fact that the biggest civilian exporter
in the country is the Boeing corporation, and the biggest single industry in
the world, tourism, is founded largely on technology that was developed
through the American military system-namely, airplanes-and that it's been
pouring huge sums of money into sectors of the American economy for
decades.22 Well, the Clinton administration and Congress have increased all
of those subsidies-in fact, Clinton's military budget is well above the Cold
War average-and the Contract With America pro-

Chapter Ten
369
grams include plenty of other forms of direct handouts and subsidies to the
wealthy as well. 23
The second kind of welfare payment that's being extended is regressive
fiscal measures-which are just another way of disguising welfare to the
rich. So for example, if you increase tax deductions for business expenses,
let's say, that is the exact financial equivalent of giving out a welfare check.
I mean, suppose there's a mother with six kids and no job, and she gets a
hundred-dollar check-okay, that's welfare. Now suppose it's me, somebody
who's rich, and I get a hundred dollars of tax relief because I have a home
mortgage: it's the same government payment. I mean, one of them is a
direct sum of money and the other is hidden in regressive fiscal measures,
but from an economic standpoint, they're exactly the same thing-like, it
would come out exactly the same if they gave me the hundred dollars and
took a hundred dollars off her taxes.
Well, if you take a look at all of the welfare that goes to the rich through
regressive fiscal measures like these, it is absolutely huge. Take tax writeoffs for charitable contributions: almost all of that goes to the rich, it's a
way for them to cut down on their taxes-which means it's a subsidy, exactly
the equivalent of a welfare check. Or take tax deductions for home
mortgages: about 80 percent of that welfare goes to people with incomes of
over $50,000 a year, and the deductions get disproportionately greater the
higher your income-like, if you have a million-dollar home, you get a much
bigger write-off than if you have a two hundred thousand-dollar home or
something.24 Or just look at income-tax deductions for business expenses:
that is a massive welfare program, and it all goes to the rich. So there's a
book by a Canadian writer, Linda Mcquaig, which estimates that the tax
loss in Canada for what are called "business entertainment deductions"-like
taking your friends out to hundred-dollar seats at the baseball game, and to
fancy dinners and all that kind of stuff-is not far below what would be
needed to give daycare to 750,000 Canadian kids who now can't get it.25
And remember, Canada's a far smaller country than the United States is, far
smaller. Well, those are all welfare handouts too-and what's happening is
they're being increased, while at the same time anything that might help
poor people is being cut back.
It's striking to see the way they're doing it, actually. For instance, they
decided not to go after Medicare for now-they probably will sooner or later,
but for now they're not. And the reason is, rich people get Medicare. But
they are going after Medicaid right away, because that only goes to poor
people [Medicare is a federal health insurance program for the elderly and
disabled, and Medicaid is a federally-funded health care program for those
with low incomes]. In fact, there were three big programs that they intended to go after right from the time of the '94 election: one was
Medicaid, one was Aid for Families with Dependent Children, and the third
was Food Stamps. Well, Food Stamps quickly got kicked off the list. You
know why? Because there's a big agri-business lobby behind it. See, Food
Stamps does

370

Understanding Power

happen to feed poor people, but it's also a major handout to high-tech commercial agriculture and big commerce, so those interests immediately
started to lobby for it-because they want it. So that was taken off the list.26
What about Aid for Families with Dependent Children? Well, for one
thing, it's dropped very sharply since 1970, even without "Welfare Reform." I mean, compared to 1970, maximum A.F.D.C. benefits for an average family had fallen by about 40 percent in real terms by 1995.17 In fact,
we always hear in the media and from politicians how there's so much welfare for the poor in the United States, but the reality is that the United
States is completely off the international spectrum in this respect-we give
far less than any other industrialized country.28
Well, A.F.D.C. still has around nine million young children on it; these
guys want to take five million of them off. Alright, those are children-average age: seven.29 And if you just look at the families who are receiving
welfare under the program, what you find is that a substantial number of
the mothers are young women who've been raped, or abused, or never had
any educational opportunities, and so on. Well, under the current dogmas,
their children, seven-year-old children, they have to be taught "fiscal responsibility"-but not Newt Gingrich's constituents. They have to keep being
funded by the public.30
So Bill Clinton and all these others are talking about "welfare reform"
these days-but no one's suggesting that we put executives to work: they're
going to keep getting welfare, it's only poor mothers who are supposed to
be forced into "work obligations" [i.e. parents must obtain jobs or lose
benefits after receiving welfare for a specified period]. It's these sevenyear-old kids who now have to be forced to internalize our values: that
there are no human rights, they don't exist, the only human rights people
have are what they can gain for themselves on the labor market. And the
way they're going to be forced to learn those lessons is by driving their
mothers to work-instead of all this non-work like raising children. I mean,
it's astonishing the sexism that has been so institutionalized in the culture
that people just accept the idea that raising children isn't "work" - "work" is
things like speculating in financial markets. Child-care's just taken for
granted, it's supposed to come free because you don't get a paycheck for it.
Crime Control and "Superfluous" People
The other thing the Clinton "New" Democrats and Gingrich Republicans
both want is to build up crime control-and there's a very simple reason for
that: you've got a big superfluous population you aren't letting survive in
your system, what are you going to do with them? Answer: you lock them
up. So in Reagan America, the jail population in the U.S. more than
tripled-tripled-and it's been going up very fast ever since.31 In the

Chapter Ten
371
mid-1980s, the United States passed its main competitors in per capita
prison population: South Africa and Russia (though now that Russia's
learned our values, they've caught up with us again). So by this point, well
over a million and a half people are in prison in the United States-it's by far
the highest per capita prison population of the Western countries-and it's
going to go way up now, because the 1994 Crime Bill was extremely harsh.
32
Furthermore, the prisons in the United States are so inhuman by this point
that they are being condemned by international human rights organizations
as literally imposing torture.33 And these people all want to increase thatthey're statist reactionaries, remember: what they really want is a very
powerful and violent state, contrary to what they might say.
Also, if you just look at the composition of the prison population, you'll
find that the crime-control policy that's been developed is very finely honed
to target select populations. So for example, what's called the "War on
Drugs," which has very little to do with stopping the flow of drugs, has a lot
to do with controlling the inner-city populations, and poor people in general. In fact, by now over half the prisoners in federal prisons are there on
drug charges-and it's largely for possession offenses, meaning victimless
crimes, about a third just for marijuana.34 Moreover, the "Drug War" specifically has been targeted on the black and Hispanic populations-that's one
of its most striking features. So for instance, the drug of choice in the ghetto
happens to be crack cocaine, and you get huge mandatory sentences for it;
the drug of choice in the white suburbs, like where I live, happens to be
powder cocaine, and you don't get anywhere near the same penalties for it.
In fact, the sentence ratio for those drugs in the federal courts is 100 to 1. 35
Okay?
And really there's nothing particularly new about this kind of technique
of population control. So if you look at the history of marijuana prohibitions in the United States, you'll find that they began with legislation in the
southwestern states which was aimed at Mexican immigrants who were
coming in, who happened to use marijuana. Now, nobody had any reason to
believe that marijuana was dangerous or anything like that-and obviously it
doesn't even come close to alcohol, let alone tobacco, in its negative
consequences. But these laws were set up to try to control a population they
were worried about.36 In fact, if you look closely, even Prohibition had an
element of this-it was part of an effort to control groups like Irish immigrants and so on. I mean, the Prohibition laws [which were part of the U.S.
Constitution from 1919 to 1933] were intended to close down the saloons in
New York City, not to stop the drinking in upper New York State. In
Westchester County and places like that, everybody just continued on
drinking exactly as before-but you didn't want these immigrants to have
saloons where they could get together and become dangerous in the urban
centers, and so on.37
Well, what's been going on with drugs in recent years is kind of an analog of that, but in the United States today it also happens to be race-related,

372

Understanding Power

for a number of reasons, so therefore it's in large part aimed against black
and Latino males. I mean, this is mainly a war against the superfluous population, which is the poor working class-but the race/class correlation is
close enough in the inner cities that when you go after the poor working
class, you're mostly going after blacks. So you get these astonishing racial
disparities in crime statistics, all across the board.38 And the point is, the
urban poor are kind of a useless population from the perspective of power,
they don't really contribute to profit-making, so as a result you want to get
rid of them-and the criminal justice system is one of the best ways of doing
it.
So take a significant question you never hear asked despite this supposed
"Drug War" which has been going on for years and years: how many
bankers and chemical corporation executives are in prison in the United
States for drug-related offenses? Well, there was recently an O.E.C.D. [Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development] study of the international drug racket, and they estimated that about a half-trillion dollars
of drug money gets laundered internationally every year-more than half of
it through American banks. I mean, everybody talks about Colombia as the
center of drug-money laundering, but they're a small player: they have
about $10 billion going through, U.S. banks have about $260 billion.39
Okay, that's serious crime-it's not like robbing a grocery store. So American
bankers are laundering huge amounts of drug money, everybody knows it:
how many bankers are in jail? None. But if a black kid gets caught with a
joint, he goes to jail.
And actually, it would be pretty easy to trace drug-money laundering if
you were serious about it-because the Federal Reserve requires that banks
give notification of all cash deposits made of over $10,000, which means
that if enough effort were put into monitoring them, you could see where
all the money's flowing. Well, the Republicans deregulated in the 1980s-so
now they don't check. In fact, when George Bush was running the "Drug
War" under Reagan, he actually canceled the one federal program for this
which did exist, a project called "Operation Greenback." It was a pretty tiny
thing anyway, and the whole Reagan/Bush program was basically designed
to let this go on-but as Reagan's "Drug Czar," Bush nevertheless canceled
it.40
Or why not ask another question-how many U.S. chemical corporation
executives are in jail? Well, in the 1980s, the C.I.A. was asked to do a
study on chemical exports to Latin America, and what they estimated was
that more than 90 percent of them are not being used for industrial production at all-and if you look at the kinds of chemicals they are, it's obvious
that what they're really being used for is drug production.41 Okay, how
many chemical corporation executives are in jail in the United States?
Again, none-because social policy is not directed against the rich, it's directed against the poor.
Actually, recently there've been some very interesting studies of urban
police behavior done at George Washington University, by a rather well-

Chapter Ten
373
known criminologist named William Chambliss. For the last couple years
he's been running projects in cooperation with the Washington D.C. police,
in which he has law students and sociology students ride with the police in
their patrol cars to take transcripts of what happens. I mean, you've got to
read this stuff: it is all targeted against the black and Hispanic populations,
almost entirely. And they are not treated like a criminal population, because
criminals have Constitutional rights-they're treated like a population under
military occupation. So the effective laws are, the police go to somebody's
house, they smash in the door, they beat the people up, they grab some kid
they want, and they throw him in jail. And the police aren't doing it because
they're all bad people, you know-that's what they're being told to do.42
Well, part of the Contract With America was to increase all of this. They
weren't satisfied with the 1994 Crime Bill-and the reason is, the original
1994 Crime Bill still allowed for things like Pell Grants for people in prison
[i.e. college subsidies available to capable, low-income students), which are
a very small expense. See, most of the people who are in jail have never
completed high school, and Pell Grants help give them some degree of education. Alright, there are many studies of this, and it's turned out that the
effect of Pell Grants is to cut back on recidivism, to cut back violence. But
for people like the Gingrich Republicans, that doesn't make any sense--they
want people in jail, and they want violence, so they're going to cut out
small expenses like that so that we can have even more people thrown into
jail.43
Also, all of this "crime control" spending is another huge taxpayer stimulus to the economy-mainly to parts of the construction industry, and to
lawyers, and other professionals. Well, that's another very useful way to
force the public to keep paying off the rich-and by now "crime control"
spending is approaching the Pentagon budget in scale; it's still not quite as
favored as the Pentagon, because the spending's not as sharply skewed towards the wealthy, but nevertheless it's useful.44 And as the society keeps
taking on more and more Third World-type characteristics, we should certainly expect that the repression will continue-and that it will continue to be
funded and extended, through the Contract With America or whatever other
technique they can come up with.
Violence and Repression
MAN: Dr. Chomsky, around where I work out in Fresno, California, the
local government has instituted a policy where they have three S.W.A.T
teams roving the streets with rifles, to reduce the level of violence. My
question for you is, as an organizer, how can one deal with the fact that
this is what the people really want?
What is what the people really want? They want S.W.A.T. teams?

374

Understanding Power

MAN: Yeah.
Who wants them-the people in the slums?
MAN: Well, the mayor ran his election campaign on this; it's a pilot project
in California. 45
And who voted for him-the people in the slums?
MAN: I don't really know ...
Well, there are a couple of points to be made. First of all, I don't know
Fresno specifically, but the way it usually works is, voting in the United
States is a very skewed affair: the wealthy have a huge amount of clout,
largely because of business propaganda, but also through a whole range of
other methods, including things like gerrymandering. So that's one point.
But another thing is, this whole bit about "combating violence" is something you've really got to look at more closely. So I don't know the particular area you're talking about very well, but the fact is, a large portion of the
country's population is being dismissed as superfluous because they do not
play a role in profit-making-and those people are increasingly being cooped
up in concentration camps, which we happen to call "slums." Now, it's true
that internal to those concentration camps there's a lot of violence-but that's
kind of like violence internal to a family or something: wealthier sectors are
pretty well insulated from it.46
So take me: I live in a mostly lily-white, very liberal professional suburb
just outside Boston, called Lexington. And we have our own police force,
which is mostly for finding stray cats and things like that. Except for one
thing: it's also a Border Patrol. I mean, nobody there will tell you this, but if
you want to find it out, just get some black friend of yours to drive a broken-down car into Lexington and watch how many seconds it takes before
he's out.
Well, that's how the panic about combating violence tends to play out.
But if you actually look at the facts about the general level of violence in
the U.S., there's really no evidence that it's increased over the past twenty
years-in fact, the statistics say it's actually decreased.47 Furthermore, contrary to what a lot of people believe, crime rates in the United States are not
all that high relative to other countries-if you look at other developed
countries, like Australia and France and so on, U.S. crime rates are sort of
at the high end, but not off the spectrum. In fact, about the only category in
which U.S. crime rates are way off the map is homicides with guns-but
that's because of crazy gun-control laws here, it doesn't particularly have to
do with "crime." 48
Now, the popular perception certainly is that violence is greater todaybut that's mostly propaganda: that's just a part of the whole effort to make

Chapter Ten

375

people frightened, so that they'll abandon their rights. And of course, it all
has a real racist undertone to it, there are little code words that are used,
"Willie Horton" kinds of things, to try to get everyone to think there's some
black man out there trying to rape their daughter. [Horton was a black prisoner who raped a white woman while on furlough from prison; his image
was used by the Republicans in T.V. ads to portray the Democrats as "soft
on crime."] Yeah, that's the kind of image you want to convey if your goal
is to keep people divided and calling for more repression in the society.
And the success of it all in the last few years has been very dramatic.
In fact, the perception of more violence is rather like what's happened in
the case of welfare: people's image is that welfare has gone way up, but the
reality is, it's gone way, way down.49 So I don't know if you've looked at
the polls on this, but people's attitudes are really quite striking. For
example, when you ask them, "Do you think we're spending too much on
welfare or too little?," 44 percent say we're spending too much, and 23
percent say we're spending too little. But if you take exactly the same
question and you just replace the word "welfare" with "assistance to the
poor"-so now you're saying, "Are we giving too much or too little
assistance to the poor?"-the numbers change radically: 13 percent say it's
too much, and 64 percent say it's too little.50 Alright, that's kind of funny:
what's welfare? It's assistance to the poor. So how come you get this
strange result? Because people have bought the racist line. The image they
have of "welfare" is black mothers driving Cadillacs past some poor white
guy who's working:
Reaganite propaganda. And I think it's pretty much the same kind of story
with the perception of more violence.
Look: the public relations industry doesn't spend billions of dollars just
for the fun of it.51 They do it for reasons, and those reasons are to instill certain imagery, and to impose certain means of social control. And one of the
best means of controlling people has always been induced fear: for Hitler it
was Jews and homosexuals and Gypsies; here it's blacks.
So yes, there is violence-but it's mostly the kind of violence that results
from being cooped up in concentration camps. I mean, if you look at
Hitler's concentration camps during World War II, there was also internal
violence. That happens: if people are sufficiently deprived, they'll turn on
one another. But when you say that people in California want S.W.A.T.
teams, I doubt that the people in the concentration camps do-because those
S.W.A.T. teams are at war with them. It's just that those people typically
are not a part of the "public" that actually decides on things in the United
States; more powerful elements do. And they decide the way they do for
the same reason the liberals out in Lexington want a Border Patrol, although they won't say so of course: because you want to confine the violence somewhere else, so your own family won't be affected.
Like, take Cobb County, Georgia, the rich suburb outside Atlanta that's
Newt Gingrich's district-which gets more federal subsidies than any suburban county in the United States, incidentally, despite its leader's calls to
"get government off our backs" (only Arlington, Virginia, the home of the

376

Understanding Power

Pentagon, and Brevard County, Florida, where the Kennedy Space Center
is, get more). Well, in Cobb County, I'm sure they're also very afraid of
violence and want S.W.A.T. teams to insulate them from any urban
infection that might make its way out from downtown Atlanta.52 Sure, and
it's the same thing all over the place. So I suspect that's probably what
you're seeing in Fresno as well.
Now, if you really want to talk about violence, there's plenty of it-but
not the kind you're talking about. For example, take the biggest killer of
them all: tobacco. Compared with tobacco, hard drugs don't even exist.
Deaths from tobacco far outweigh deaths from all hard drugs combined,
probably by a factor of more than a hundred.53 Do you see Jesse Helms in
jail? I mean, there used to be a House Committee that regulated among
other things the tobacco industry-it's gone now, because it was flat taken
over by a tobacco company-but in its last meeting, its members released a
study that made it to the back pages of the newspapers, and was very interesting. It turned out that the data that everybody had been using for the last
couple years on the effects of passive smoking [i.e. breathing of smoke
from other people's cigarettes] were coming from tobacco-industry studiesand they were faked. People re-did the studies and found that they were a
total fraud, they made the problem look far less significant.54 Alright, that
means these tobacco-industry executives and their U.S. government
puppets have been killing thousands and thousands of people-they're killing
young children, say, whose mothers are smoking. Are they in jail? Why
isn't that violence?
In fact, right now U.S. state power is being used to force Asian countries
to open their markets to advertising for American tobacco. For instance,
we're telling China, "You don't allow us to advertise tobacco to the emerging markets of women and youth, and we'll close off your exports"--so then
they just have to do it. Alright, recently there was a study done at Oxford
University which estimated that of the kids under 20 alive today in China,
about fifty million of them are going to die from tobacco-related diseases.56
Killing fifty million people is fairly impressive, even by twentieth-century
standards-why isn't that "violence"? That's the violence of the American
state working for the interests of American tobacco manufacturers. You
wouldn't need S.W.A.T. teams to go after that kind of violence, you'd just
need to apply laws. The trouble is, it's the rich and the powerful who
enforce the laws, and they don't want to apply them to themselves.
WOMAN: Noam, you just mentioned that Gingrich's county in Georgia
is one of the leading recipients of federal government subsidies-I was wondering, why didn't the Democrats make that an issue during the 1994 elections? I've never heard it before, but you'd have thought that would be a
very strong tactic for them to use at the time, given the Gingrich group's
campaign strategy?

Chapter Ten

377

That's an interesting side-light to the '94 election story, isn't it-the absolute silence of the Democrats about that? I mean, during the whole campaign, Newt Gingrich was just slaughtering them with the line that they're
always pushing the "welfare state" and the "nanny state" and all this government spending all the time-but no one in the press or in the political
system ever once made the obvious rejoinder that would have wiped him
out in three minutes: that Newt Gingrich is the leading advocate of the welfare state in the entire country. I mean, that would have been the end of the
entire discussion-but the Democrats never even raised a peep. Like, nobody
raised the fact that the largest employer in Cobb County is the Lockheed
corporation [an armaments contractor], a publicly-subsidized! private-profit
corporation that wouldn't exist except for taxpayer subsidies. Or nobody
pointed out that 72 percent of the jobs in Cobb County are white-collar jobs
in industries like electronics and computers-which are all very carefully
tended by the "nanny state," and in fact wouldn't be around in the first place
if it hadn't been for massive public subsidies through the military system for
decades.56
And I think the reason for that lack of comment is pretty obvious, actually. I think the reason is that class interests overpower narrow political interests, and there's a real and very important class interest, shared right
across the board in the United States, that the rich always must be protected
from market discipline by a very powerful welfare state-that simply can't be
called into question at all. I mean, the poor can be subjected to the marketthat's perfectly fine. But not the rich: they need constant subsidies and
protection, like they get in Cobb County.
Well, you can't say any of that publicly, of course, because then people
might start to get the idea-and that would be very dangerous. So therefore,
even if they get smashed in the elections, the Democrats still won't tell you
the truth: that Newt Gingrich is the leading advocate of the "nanny state,"
and that what he wants is a big, powerful, interventionist government that
will keep providing the rich with constant economic subsidy and protection.
The 1994 elections were a perfect illustration of the point-and again, it's
another sign of the kind of democracy we really have in the United States
that nobody even mentioned it.
International Capital: the New Imperial Age
MAN: In the past twenty-five years, there has been such a massive expansion of multinational finance capital being used for speculation in international stock markets, rather than for investment and trade, that it seems by
now the United States is just a colony at the mercy of the movements of international capital-it doesn't much matter who's in office, they're not the
ones really setting the agenda anymore. What's the significance of that phenomenon on the international scene right now?

378

Understanding Power

Well, first of all, we really ought to be a bit more cautious with our language-including myself, because I talk this way all the time. We shouldn't
talk about things like "the United States"-because there is no such entity,
just like there's no such entity as "England" or "Japan" or anything like that.
The population of the United States may be "colonized," but the corporate
interests that are based in the United States aren't "colonized" at all. So you
sometimes hear about "America in decline"-and if you look at the share of
the world's manufacturing production that happens to take place in the
United States, it's true, that is in decline. But if you look at the share of the
world's manufacturing production that's done by U.S.-based corporations,
that's not in decline at all: in fact, it's doing extremely nicely. It's just that
that production is now taking place mostly in the Third World.57 So you
know, one can talk about the geographical entity "the United States"-but
that is not what functions in world affairs. To be brief about it, unless you
begin with an elementary class analysis, you aren't even in the real world:
things like "the United States" aren't entities.
But you're right, most of the population of the United States is being
driven towards kind of a Third World "colonized" status-it's just that we
should remember, there's another sector in the world, which includes rich
corporate executives and investors, plus their people in the Third World,
like some Mafia thug in Russia who's running their local thing for them or
some rich guy in Sao Paulo, and they're a much different grouping. Those
people have never been doing better.
Now, about speculative capital-that's an extremely important part of this.
You're absolutely correct that it's having a huge impact on national
governments. This is really a major phenomenon. Just the numbers themselves are dramatic.
Back around 1970, about 90 percent of the capital involved in international economic transactions was being used for more or less productive
commercial purposes, like production and trade, and about 10 percent was
being used for speculation. Today those figures are reversed: by 1990,
about 90 percent was being used for speculation, and by 1994 it was up to
95 percent. Furthermore, the absolute amount of speculative capital has just
exploded: the last estimate I saw from the World Bank was that there is
now about $14 trillion involved-which means there's now $14 trillion free
to transfer from one national economy to another, an amount which just
overwhelms any national government's resources, and leaves governments
with only an extremely narrow range of choices when it comes to setting
policies.58
Well, why has this huge growth of speculative capital happened? There
have been two key reasons. The first had to do with the breakdown of the
post-war world economic system, which occurred in the early 1970s. See,
during the Second World War, the United States basically reorganized the
world economic system and made itself into sort of the "global banker" [at
the Bretton Woods United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference of

Chapter Ten
379
1944]-so, the U.S. dollar became the global reserve currency, it was fixed
to gold, and other countries' currencies were fixed relative to the dollar.
And that system was pretty much what lay behind the very substantial economic growth rate that followed in the 1950s and Sixties. But by the 1970s,
the "Bretton Woods" system had become unsustainable: the U.S. no longer
was strong enough economically to remain the world's banker, primarily
because of the huge costs of financing the Vietnam War. So Richard Nixon
at that point made a decision to just dismantle the whole arrangement: in
the early 1970s he took the United States off the gold standard, he raised
import duties, he just destroyed the whole system totally. Well, after this international regulatory apparatus had been destroyed, we started to get
speculation against currencies on an unprecedented scale, and fluctuating
financial exchanges, all these other things that have kept growing ever
Since.
The second main factor behind this explosion of speculative capital has
been the technological revolution in telecommunications-which took place
in the same period, and which suddenly made it very easy to transfer
currencies from one country to another. So for example, today virtually the
whole of the New York Stock Exchange moves overnight to Tokyo: the
money is in New York in the daytime, then they just wire it over to Japan
every night, and since Japan is 14 hours ahead of us, the same money is
used in both places. And by now, about a trillion dollars a day moves
around in international speculative markets like that-and that has just a
huge effect on national governments. 59 In fact, by this point, what it
means is that the international investing community has virtual veto-power
over what any national government can do.
We're seeing it in the United States right now, actually. The United
States has had a very sluggish recovery from the last recession-it may be
the slowest recovery ever; certainly it's the slowest one since the end of the
Second World War. But it's been sluggish in only one respect: there's been
very low economic growth, very little job creation (in fact, for many years
wages were actually going down in this "recovery"), but profits have been
absolutely zooming.6o So every year Fortune magazine has an issue
devoted to the well-being of the important people of the world, the
"Fortune 500," and what it's reported during this period is that profits went
through the sky: in 1993 they were very happy, in 1994 they were euphoric,
and 1995 just broke all records. Meanwhile real wages were going down,
growth was very low, production was low-and even the slow growth that's
been taking place has been halted at times because the bond market, as they
put it, "signaled" that it didn't like the growth.
See, financial speculators don't want growth: what they want is stable
currencies, meaning no growth. In fact, the business press talks very openly
now about "the threat of too much growth," "the threat of too much employment": they're perfectly open about all of this, to one another.61 And the
reason for it is, people who speculate against currencies are afraid of in-

380

Understanding Power

flation-because it decreases the value of their money, so therefore it's a big
threat to them. And any kind of growth, any kind of stimulation of the
economy, any decline of unemployment all threaten to increase inflation.
Well, currency speculators don't like that, so if they see signs of stimulative
economic policies or anything that may bring economic growth, they'll just
take their capital out of that country's economy-and even a slight withdrawal of that sort can easily trigger a recession in those countries.
So what's happened as a result of all of this is a big drift internationally
towards low-growth, low-wage, high-profit economies-because national
governments trying to make economic and social policy decisions just have
very little leeway to do so by now, or else their economies will be wrecked
by capital flight. I mean, Third World governments have no chance at all of
doing so at this point-they don't even have any possibility of carrying out a
national economic policy. But by now, it's even a question whether big
countries can-including the United States. I mean, I don't think that any
administration we've had in the United States has wanted to do things much
differently here-but if they had wanted to, I think it would have been
extremely hard, if not impossible.
Just to give you an indication, right after the 1992 election, the Wall
Street Journal ran a front-page article just informing its readers that there
was no reason to fear that any of the alleged "lefties" around Clinton would
do things differently when they got into office. Of course, the business
community already knew that perfectly well, as you can see by taking a
look at the stock markets towards the end of the election campaign. But in
any event, the Wall Street Journal explained why, if by some accident Clinton or any other candidate did try to initiate a program of social reform in
the United States, it would immediately be cut off. They simply stated
what's obvious, and they gave the numbers.
The United States is deeply in debt-that was part of the whole Reagan/Bush program, in fact: to put the country so deeply in debt that there
would be virtually no way for the government to pursue programs of social
spending anymore. And what "being in debt" really means is that the Treasury Department has sold a ton of securities-bonds and notes and so onto
investors, who then trade them back and forth on the bond market. Well,
according to the Wall Street Journal, by now about $150 billion a day
worth of U.S. Treasury securities alone is traded this way. The article then
explained what this means: it means that if the investing community which
holds those securities doesn't like any U.S. government policies, it can very
quickly sell off just a tiny signal amount of Treasury bonds, and that will
have the automatic effect of raising the interest rate, which then will have
the further automatic effect of increasing the deficit. Okay, this article calculated that if such a "signal" sufficed to raise the interest rate by 1 percent,
it would add $20 billion to the deficit overnight-meaning if Clinton (say in
someone's dream) proposed a $20 billion social spending program, the international investing community could effectively turn it into a $40 billion

Chapter Ten

381

program instantly, just by a signal, and any further moves in that direction
would be totally cut off.62
Similarly, there was a great article in the London Economist-you know,
the big free-trade pop-ideology journal-about the fact that Eastern European countries have been voting Socialists and Communists back into
power. But the basic line of the article was, don't worry about it, because as
they said, "policy is insulated from politics"-meaning, no matter what
games these guys play in the political arena, policy's going to go on exactly
the way it is, because we've got them by the balls: we control the international currencies, we're the only ones who can give them loans, we can destroy their economies if we want to, there's nothing they can do. I mean,
they can play all of the political games they want to, they can pretend they
have a democracy if they like-anything they please-so long as "policy remains insulated from politics." 63
What's been happening in the contemporary period is really something
quite new in history, actually. I mean, in recent years a completely new
form of government is being pioneered, one designed to serve the
developing needs of this new international corporate ruling class-it's what
has sometimes been called an emerging "de facto world government."
That's what all of the new international trade agreements are about,
N.A.F.T.A., G.A.T.T., and so on; it's what the E.E.C. [European Economic
Community] is about; it's increasingly taking shape in international
financial organizations like the International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the World Trade
Organization, the G-7 planning meetings of the rich industrial countries,
and so on and so forth. These are all efforts to try to centralize power in a
world economic system geared towards ensuring that "policy is insulated
from politics"-in other words, towards ensuring that the general populations
of the world have no role in decision-making, and that the level of policy
planning is raised to be so remote from people's knowledge and
understanding and input that they have absolutely no idea about the various
decisions that are being made that will affect their lives, and certainly
couldn't influence them if they did.
The World Bank has its own term for the phenomenon: they call it "technocratic insulation." So if you read World Bank studies, they talk about the
importance of having "technocratic insulation" -meaning a bunch of technocrats, who are essentially employees of the big transnational corporations, have to be working somewhere in "insulation" from the public to
design all the policies, because if the public ever gets involved in the
process they may have bad ideas, like wanting the kind of economic growth
that does things for people instead of profits, all sorts of stupid stuff like
that. So therefore what you want to have is insulated technocrats-and once
they're insulated enough, then you can have all the "democracy" you like,
since it's not going to make any difference. In the international business
press, this has all been described pretty frankly as "The New Imperial
Age." And that's quite accurate: it's certainly the direction things are going
in.64

382

Understanding Power
The Fairy Tale Economy

MAN: A few moments ago, you described the 1990s economy as "sluggish," with low growth and low wages. Usually we hear that this is a "fairy
tale" economy and everything's wonderful. Can you say something more
about that?
Well, there's a very important book that comes out every two years,
called The State of Working America. It's kind of the main, standard database for what's going on for working people-meaning most everybody in
the economy. The latest data goes up through 1997. And it tells you just
what the "fairy tale" economy is. It's nothing that everybody doesn't know,
they just give all the data.
Since the mid-Seventies, the economy has slowed down: there's been a
period of much lower growth than the post-war period. Virtually all the
wealth that's been created has gone to the very top part of the income distribution. The typical family is now working about fifteen weeks a year
more than they did twenty years ago, at stagnating or declining real incomes. The United States now has the heaviest workload in the industrial
world. It's also the only country in the industrial world that doesn't have
legally mandated vacations. And with that, incomes are at best stagnating
for the majority of the population.65
Now, it is a "fairy tale" economy-and the reason it's a "fairy tale"
economy is because for the top few percent of the population, incomes
have gone through the roof. The book points out that essentially the only
gains in the past twenty years have been to C.E.O.s, and through asset
inflation in the stock market. Well, you take a look at assets on the stock
market, they also give figures for that: it turns out that roughly half are
owned by the top one percent of the population-and of that, most is owned
by the top one-half percent. So one percent owns roughly half the stock; the
top ten percent own most of the rest. About 85 percent of the total increase
in stock values in this great stock-boom have gone to the top ten percent of
the population, mostly to the top one-half percent.66 In fact, the second
decile--you know, the 90th to 80th percentiles in income levels-have
actually lost net worth during the Clinton recovery (net worth meaning
assets minus debt). Below that, it's mostly worse.67 The ones who have been
hit hardest are the youngest. So entry-level wages are about 20 to 30
percent lower than they were twenty years ago, which tells you what's
going to happen up the road. It's now even true for white-collar workers,
even scientists and engineers. Unless they're in a very high bracket, their
wages and incomes are declining.68 So that's the "fairy tale" economy.
This Clinton recovery-which one kind of wonders about-is the first one
certainly in post-war history, maybe in American history, in which most of
the population has been left out. I mean, it wasn't until the end of 1997 that
median real income reached the level of 1989, which was the

Chapter Ten
383
peak of the last business cycle.69 That's unheard of: in every other recovery,
median income has been way higher this many years after the peak of the
last business cycle.
But for some sectors, it's fantastic. And part of the reason is just intimidating working people with job insecurity.
So this is a very good book-it's put out by the Economic Policy Institute.
It's out in paperback, and it's not that expensive. I think the data won't
surprise you, because I think you sort of know it from your lives and your
neighborhoods and so on.70 But it's not what you're reading in the New York
Times and the Wall Street Journal. Actually, in the Wall Street Journal you
do read it sometimes-but not in the popular press.
Building International Unions
WOMAN: Noam, facing an international power structure like the one you
describe, which seems to be showing no signs of letting up as it extends its
grip, clearly the response has to be organized and coordinated on a mass
scale internationally. But given the size of the problems and just the scale
of the task we're faced with, it seems nearly impossible to me, frankly. Even
just building the kinds of unions we need to develop in the United States
seems like a daunting prospect. Do you think it's really possible in today's
world?
Reconstructing a democratic trade-union movement in the United
States? Sure, I don't see why that's an impossible task, it's certainly something that's been done before. But you're right that it's not going to be so
simple.
For one thing, in the contemporary period something that's surely going
to be required, which does make it a lot harder than before, is that a real
labor movement simply has to be international today. I mean, in the old
days, labor activists used to talk about "Internationals," but that was mostly
a joke. Now the labor movement just has to be international--because there
has to be something to prevent Daimler-Benz, for example, from destroying
German work standards by shifting production over to Alabama, where
wages are much lower, and the labor's not unionized, and legislative
protections for workers are much weaker. Or take the original Free Trade
Agreement with Canada [implemented in 1989]: in the first few years of
that, Canada lost a couple hundred thousand manufacturing jobs to the
Southeastern United States for the same reasons.71
In fact, it's gotten to the point where some major corporations don't even
worry about strikes anymore, they see them as an opportunity to destroy
unions. For instance, the Caterpillar corporation recently broke an eighteenmonth strike in Decatur, Illinois [from June 1994 to December 1995], and
part of the way they did it was by developing excess production

384

Understanding Power

capacity in foreign countries. See, major corporations have a ton of capital
now, and one of the things they've been able to do with it is to build up
extra overseas production capacity. So Caterpillar has been building plants
in Brazil-where they get far cheaper labor than in the United States-and
then they can use that production capability to fill their international orders
in the event of a strike in the U.S. So they didn't really mind the strike in
Decatur, because it gave them an opportunity to finally break the union
through this international strategy.72 That's something that's relatively new,
and given this increasing centralization of power in the international economy, and the ability of big transnational corporations to play one national
workforce against another to drive down work standards everywhere, there
just has to be international solidarity today if there's going to be any hopeand that means real international solidarity.
Another thing that has to happen for an international trade union movement to really be successful, in my opinion, is that it is simply going to
have to be started from the ground up and be run by its participants. And
that kind of serious organizing is something that is very difficult to do. It's
going to be particularly tricky in the United States-because the labor
leadership here has traditionally been almost completely divorced from the
workforce. So take a look at the world-wide destruction of unions after the
Second World War: that's had a really major impact on working conditions
throughout the world, and some of the people who were doing it were in
fact the American labor leadership at the time-they were a big part of the
whole effort to break up the Italian unions, and the Japanese unions, and the
French unions, and so on.73
If you look back to the history of the reconstruction of post-World War
II Europe, American planners were very intent on preventing the rise of
popular-democratic movements there which would have been based in the
former anti-fascist resistance, which had a lot of prestige right then. And
the reason was, the world in general was very social-democratic after the
war, especially as a result of the anti-fascist struggles that had taken place.
And with the traditional order discredited and a whole lot of radicaldemocratic ideas around, powerful interests in the United States were extremely concerned that a unified labor movement could develop in a place
like Germany or Japan.
Actually, the same kind of problem also existed at home right then as
well: the U.S. population was very social-democratic after the war-it was
extremely pro-union, it wanted more government involvement in regulating
industry, probably a majority thought there should even be public industryand business was terrified by it, they were very scared. They in fact said in
their publications things like, "We have about five or six years to save the
private enterprise system." 74 Well, one thing they did was to launch a
huge propaganda program in the United States, aimed at reversing these
attitudes.75 It was actually called at the time part of "the everlasting battle
for the minds of men," who have to be "indoctrinated in the capitalist
story";

Chapter Ten

385

that's a standard straight quote from the P.R. literature.76 So in the early
1950s, the Advertising Council [an organization begun during World War
II and funded by the business community to assist the government with
propaganda services at home] was spending huge amounts of money to
propagandize for what they called "the American way." 77 The public
relations budget for the National Association of Manufacturers I think went
up by about a factor of twenty.78 About a third of the textbooks in schools
were simply provided by business.79 They had 20 million people a week
watching propaganda films about worker-management unity, after the TaftHartley Act of 1947 allowed propaganda to be shown to basically captive
audiences in companies.80 They continued on with the "scientific methods
of strikebreaking" that had been developed in the late 1930s: devoting huge
resources into propaganda instead of goon-squads and breaking knees.81
And it was all tied up with the "anti-Communist" crusade at the time-that's
the true meaning of what's referred to as "McCarthyism," which started
well before Joseph McCarthy got involved and was really launched by
business and liberal members of the Democratic Party and so on.82 It was a
way of using fear and jingoism to try to undermine labor rights and
functioning democracy.
And the point is, the leadership of the U.S. labor movement was right in
the center of the whole post-war destruction of unions, internationally. In
fact, if you look back at their records, which are very fascinating, one of the
things that they were most afraid of when they helped to smash the Italian
unions, for example, was that they were just too democratic-they wanted
them to be more like American unions, and they said so. "American
unions" means the A.F.L.leadership sits in a room somewhere and none of
the workforce knows what's going on, the leaders make the decisions, then
they go out and have lunch with some guy in the government or a corporation-that's the way a union's supposed to work here. The trouble is, the
Italian unions weren't like that. I might be exaggerating it a little-but if you
look back at these guys' records, they say it in roughly those words, actually.83
Well, when you have a history of labor leadership like that, it's another
reason why reconstituting a union movement here is simply going to have
to start from the bottom up-and I don't think that's an impossible job. It's
certainly been done under much harsher conditions than we face. I mean, if
it's possible in EI Salvador to organize a union when you've got death
squads running after you and murdering you, and then we ask, "Is this too
hard for us?"-it's kind of like a joke. If it's not happening, it's because people aren't doing it: it's not because it's too hard, it's because people aren't
doing it.
So take Haiti, the most impoverished country in the Hemisphere. I don't
know if any of you have ever traveled to Haiti, but if you go there, you can
barely believe it-I've gone to a lot of parts of the Third World, and Haiti is
just something else. But in Haiti in the late 1980s, under extremely repres-

386

Understanding Power

sive and impoverished conditions, Haitian peasants and slum-dwellers were
able to create an organized civil society: they succeeded in creating unions,
and grassroots organizations, and a whole network of popular groupings
which achieved such strength that, with no resources at all, they were able
to take over the government. Now, it turns out they immediately got
smashed by a military coup which we were assisting-but that shows you
what people can do in the world.84 If you read the American press when the
coup collapsed [in 1994], they were all saying, "Now we have to go down
and teach lessons in democracy to the Haitians"-but anybody except a
complete commissar ought to have burst out in ridicule at that. We have to
learn about democracy from the Haitians, Haitian peasants have a lot to
teach us about democracy, they show how it really works.
But the point is, if you can do it in Haiti, and if you can do it in El Salvador, you can certainly do it right now in the United States-we are much
better off than those people.
So you're right, it's certainly not going to be a walk-over-but I don't really see any reason why these things are beyond our reach. And I should
say that if they are beyond our reach, we're all in trouble-bad trouble. Because if it turns out that building genuine mass popular movements on an
international scale can't be done, it's not so obvious that there will continue
to be human civilization for very long-because part of the whole capitalist
ethic is that the only thing that matters is how much money you make tomorrow: that's the crucial value of the system, profit for tomorrow. Not just
profit, but the bottom line has to look good tomorrow. And the result is that
planning for the future, and any kind of regulatory apparatus that would
sustain the environment for the long-term, become impossible-and that
means the planet is going to go down the tubes very fast.
In fact, this was just demonstrated kind of dramatically in the United
States a little while ago. Right as the "Gingrich army" was coming into office in 1994 and describing how they're going to destroy the country's environmental regulatory system, right at that very same time a number of
scientific reports of considerable significance were released.85 One had to
do with New England-or really, the world: it had to do with the Georges
Bank fishing ground, an offshore shelf off the coast of New England.
Georges Bank has always been the richest fishing area in the world, and it
remained so through the 1970s. But in the 1980s, the Reaganites deregulated the fishing industry and at the same time subsidized it-because that's
how the "free market" works: you deregulate so the industries can do anything they want, and then the public pays them off to make sure they stay in
business. Well, when you deregulate and you subsidize the fishing industry,
it doesn't take a great genius to figure out what's going to happen-what
happened is, they wiped out the ground-fish.
Well, now New England is importing cod from Norway. Anybody from
New England knows what that means-it's unimaginable. And the reason
we're importing cod from Norway is that in Norway, they continued to reg-

Chapter Ten
387
ulate their fishing grounds; here we deregulated them, so of course they
were destroyed. So now a large part of Georges Bank is closed off to
fishing, and nobody knows if it can recover.86 Well, if they eliminate the
rest of the country's regulatory apparatus, it's going to be the same kind of
thing all over the place. So if this task of organizing a democratic society
does prove to be impossible, we're all going to be in very serious trouble:
very serious.
Initial Moves and the Coming Crisis
MAN: Do you see any steps being taken right now towards building these
kinds of international movements?
Well, I think one can see some things happening-and you can imagine
them extending to a much larger scale. Most of the things you see today are
so small that they're not really making an impact, but they're real, and they
could potentially become the start of bigger things.
For example, the first shreds of any positive move in the union movement that I'm aware of occurred right after N.A.F.T.A. was passed [in
1993]. Immediately after the N.A.F.T.A. vote, like within weeks, General
Electric and Honeywell both fired workers for trying to organize unions in
their plants in Northern Mexico. Okay, normally when that happens, that's
the end of it. This time, for the first time ever I think, two American
unions, United Electrical Workers and the Teamsters, intervened to defend
the organizers and protested to the Clinton administration. And they have
some clout: they're not like corporations, but they've got a lot more power
than Mexican unions. I mean, there really are no Mexican unions, because
Mexico's like a fascist state-there's just a government union (kind of like in
the old Soviet Union) and then essentially one other one, which of course
opposed N.A.F.T.A. but is under such terrific controls that it couldn't do
anything. But the big American unions still can't be completely ignored,
and in this case they were able to get the U.S. Labor Department to investigate these firings in Mexico.87
Well, the thing went to a U.S. Labor Department panel, which was supposed to determine whether there had in fact been an infringement of labor
rights-and of course Robert Reich's department discovered that there had
been no violations. What they said is, the fired workers had Mexican law
behind them, they still had legal recourse under Mexican law, so therefore
there was no issue for the U.S. Labor Department. I mean, you have to
read this thing-I don't know if any of you are familiar with Mexican labor
law, but this doesn't even rise to the level of hilarity. But that was the
decision, so the firings went through. The fired workers are allowed to
apply for severance pay, very happy; I'm sure G.E. is mourning. 88 But at
least in this case American unions got to the point of defending the rights
of Mexican workers for the first time-at this point out of their own
interests, because they

388

Understanding Power

recognize they're really getting crushed. But that's the kind of thing that has
to start taking place on a massive scale, if there are going to be significant
moves against these problems.
Beyond that, serious changes in the economy will simply require dismantling private power altogether-there just is no way around that in the
end. And you can even see some rudimentary steps towards it here and
there, I think. Weirton Steel was one recent effort [workers own a portion
of the company through an Employee Stock Ownership Plan]; and there are
others which could be turned into something meaningful. Even things like
the negotiations at United Airlines could be meaningful initial steps, though
ultimately it depends on whether the settlements are just in terms of stock
ownership by workers or actual employee management, which would be
something very different [United's employees traded steep pay cuts for 55
percent ownership of the company's stock and 3 of its 12 board seats in
1994].
So the methods for starting to move towards real change are quite clear,
it's just a question of whether enough people are willing to start pursuing
them. There are all sorts of options for how to begin building popular
movements, and they could be developed on a very substantial scale. Then
if they're coordinated, with genuine community efforts to take control over
whatever resources and industries are within them, and they begin to link
up internationally, anything at all is possible, I think. I mean, sure, the scale
is enormous-but with any major social change the scale has been enormous.
You could raise the same doubts about the women's movement, or getting
rid of slavery in Haiti in 1790-it must have looked impossible. There's
nothing new about that feeling.
MAN: I just get the sense that we're waiting for some ecological disaster
before people really start to get active in these movements on a massive
scale.
Well, if we wait for an ecological disaster, it'll be too late-in fact, we
might not even have such a long wait.
Look, it's certainly true that as the threats mount, it may energize peoplebut you don't wait for that to happen: first you have to prepare the ground.
For example, suppose it was discovered tomorrow that the greenhouse
effect has been way underestimated, and that the catastrophic effects are
actually going to set in 10 years from now, and not 100 years from now or
something. Well, given the state of the popular movements we have today,
we'd probably have a fascist takeover-with everybody agreeing to it,
because that would be the only method for survival that anyone could think
of. I'd even agree to it, because there just are no other alternatives around
right now.
So you don't wait for the disasters to happen, first you have to create the
groundwork. You need to plant the seeds of something right now, so that
whatever opportunities happen to arise-whether it's workers being fired

Chapter Ten

389

in Mexico, or an ecological catastrophe, or anything else-people are in a
position that they can do something constructive about it.
MAN: Dr. Chomsky, I'm actually wondering whether the corporate elites
can't turn the environmental crisis to their benefit-use it as a new technique
of taxpayer subsidy, another form of welfare like the others you were
describing? So now the public will pay them to salvage the environment
they've been primarily responsible for destroying?
Yeah, sure, you don't even have to predict it-it's already been happening.
Take DuPont: they weren't all that upset about the fact that they can no
longer sell fluorocarbons [which destroy the ozone layer and have been
closely regulated since the late 1980s], because now they can just get big
public subsidies to produce other things that will replace them.89 I mean, at
least in this respect these people are rational, so they are going to try to take
advantage of whatever techniques happen to be around to ensure that the
public is forced to keep subsidizing their profits. And if the environmental
crisis reaches the point where some changes have to be introduced-as it already has, in fact-they'll be sure to profit off them.
Actually, people are really worried about the destruction of the ozone
layer-even the Wall Street Journal editors, who are usually out in space on
these issues, have started getting worried about it. I mean, it wasn't so bad
when it was just killing people in Chile and Argentina who are near the
South Pole [i.e. where the first hole in the ozone layer was discovered], but
when they detected another hole over the Arctic in the north-meaning white
people are going to suffer someday-then even those guys finally noticed it.
9o
And when the ocean starts rising to the level of whatever building they're
in and whatever floor they're on as they write their editorials, yeah, then
they'll agree that there's a greenhouse effect and we'd better do something
about it. Sure, no matter how lunatic people are, at some point or other
they're going to realize that these problems exist, and they are approaching
fast. It's just that the next thing they'll ask is, "So how can we make some
money off it?" In fact, anybody in business who didn't ask that question
would find themselves out of business-just because that's the way that
capitalist institutions work. I mean, if some executive came along and said,
"I'm not going to look at it that way, I'm going to do things differently,"
well, they'd get replaced by someone who would try to make more money
off it-because these are simply institutional facts, these are facts about the
structure of the institutions. And if you don't like them, and I don't, then
you're going to have to change the institutions. There really is no other way.
So yes, within the framework of the institutions that currently exist, the
environmental crisis will be yet another technique of public subsidy to ensure continued private profits, and they'll keep capitalizing on it exactly as
you describe.

390

Understanding Power
Elite Planning-Slipping Out of Hand
MAN: How much of this do you attribute to a conspiracy theory, and how
much would you say is just a by-product of capital near-sightedness and a
shared interest in holding on to power?
Well, this term "conspiracy theory" is kind of an interesting one. For example, if I was talking about Soviet planning and I said, "Look, here's what
the Politburo decided, and then the Kremlin did this," nobody would call
that a "conspiracy theory"-everyone would just assume that I was talking
about planning. But as soon as you start talking about anything that's done
by power in the West, then everybody calls it a "conspiracy theory." You're
not allowed to talk about planning in the West, it's not allowed to exist. So
if you're a political scientist, one of the things you learn-you don't even
make it into graduate school unless you've already internalized it-is that
nobody here ever plans anything: we just act out of a kind of general
benevolence, stumbling from here to here, sometimes making mistakes and
so on. The guys in power aren't idiots, after all. They do planning. In fact,
they do very careful and sophisticated planning. But anybody who talks
about it, and uses government records or anything else to back it up, is into
"conspiracy theory."
It's the same with business: business is again just operating out of a generalized benevolence, trying to help everybody get the cheapest goods with
the best quality, all this kind of stuff. If you say: "Look, Chrysler is trying
to maximize profits and market share," that's "conspiracy theory." In other
words, as soon as you describe elementary reality and attribute minimal rationality to people with power-well, that's fine as long as it's an enemy, but
if it's a part of domestic power, it's a "conspiracy theory" and you're not
supposed to talk about it.
So, the first thing I would suggest is, drop the term. There are really only
two questions. One is, how much of this is conscious planning-as happens
everywhere else. And the other is, how much is bad planning?
Well, it's all conscious planning: there is just no doubt that a lot of very
conscious planning goes on among intelligent people who are trying to
maximize their power. They'd be insane if they didn't do that. I mean, I'm
not telling you anything new when I tell you that top editors, top government officials, and major businessmen have meetings together-of course.
And not only do they have meetings, they belong to the same golf clubs,
they go to the same parties, they went to the same schools, they flow up
and back from one position to another in the government and private sector,
and so on and so forth. In other words, they represent the same social class:
they'd be crazy if they didn't communicate and plan with each other.
So of course the Board of Directors of General Motors plans, the same
way the National Security Council plans, and the National Association of
Manufacturers' P.R. agencies plan. I mean, this was a truism to Adam

Smith: if you read Adam Smith [classical economist], he says that every
time two businessmen get together in a room, you cna be sure there's some
plan being cooked up which is going to hamr the public. Yeah, how could it
be otherwise? And there's nothing particularly new about this-as Smith
pointed out over two hundred years ago, the "masters of mankind," as he
called them, will do what they have to in order to follow "the vile maxim":
"all for ourselves and nothing for anyone else."91 Yeah, and when they're in
the National Security Council, or the Business Roundtable [a national
organization composed of the C.E.O.s of 200 major corporations], or the rest
of these elite planning forums, they have extreme power behind them. And
yes, they're planning--planning very carefully.
Now, the only significant question to ask is, is it intelligent planning?
Okay, that depends on what the goals are. If the goals are to maximize corporate profits for tomorrow, then it's very intelligent planning. If the goals
are to have a world where your children can survive, then it's completely
idiotic. But that second thing really isn't a part of the game. In fact, it's
institutionalized: it's not that these people are stupid, it's that to the extent
that you have a competitive system based on private control over resources,
you are forced to maximize short-term gain. That's just an institutional
necessity.
I mean, suppose there were three car companies: Chrysler, General Motors, and Ford. And suppose that one of them decided to put its resources
into producing fuel-efficient, user-friendly cars which could be available
ten years from now, and which would have a much less destructive impact
on the environment-suppose Ford decided to put a proportion of its resources into that. Well, Chrysler wouldn't be putting its resources into that,
which means that they would undersell Ford today, and Ford wouldn't be in
the game ten years from now. Well, that's just the nature of a competitive
system-and that's exactly why if you're a manager you've got to try to make
sure that in the next financial quarter your bottom line shows something
good, whatever effects it may have a year from now: that's just part of the
institutional irrationality of the system.
In fact, here I must say I would like to complain about a recent cover of
Z Magazine. I had an article in there, and on the cover there was the title:
"Corporate Greed." But that's just an absurd phrase.92 I mean, to talk about
"corporate greed" is like talking about "military weapons" or something
like that-there just is no other possibility. A corporation is something that is
trying to maximize power and profit: that's what it is. There is no
"phenomenon" of corporate greed, and we shouldn't mislead people into
thinking there is. It's like talking about "robber's greed" or something like
that-it's not a meaningful thing, it's misleading. A corporation's purpose is
to maximize profit and market share and return to investors, and all that
kind of stuff, and if its officers don't pursue that goal, for one thing they are
legally liable for not pursuing it. There I agree with Milton Friedman
[right-wing economist] and those guys: if you're a C.E.O., you must do
that-otherwise you're in dereliction of duty, in fact dereliction of offi-

.,~
}

392

Understanding Power

cial legal duty.93 And besides that, if you don't do it, you'll get kicked out
by the shareholders or the Board of Directors, and you won't be there very
long anyway.
So in a sense the planning is "bad," if you like-like it's stupid to destroy
Georges Bank if you're thinking about five years from now. But it's not stupid if you're thinking of tomorrow's profits. And I think the question we
need to ask is, which of those things are we concerned about?
In fact, it's interesting to look at the history of the government regulatory
system in the United States in this context-things like the I.C.C. [Interstate
Commerce Commission] and so on. Keep in mind that these governmental
regulatory agencies were mostly instituted by business itself, particularly
capital-intensive, internationally-oriented big business-because they recognized that the predatory nature of capitalism was just going to destroy
everything if they didn't bring it under control somehow. So they wanted
regulation to keep things kind of organized-just like they wanted labor
unions, and they wanted the New Deal programs. In fact, if you look at
many of the things that have really improved the country, like the New
Deal programs in the 1930s, for example (which at least partially brought
the United States into the main framework of industrial societies with
respect to social programs), a lot of the drive behind them was coming from
big business, as opposed to small business.
See, big corporations like General Electric and so on-which are capitalintensive, and have relatively small labor forces and an international orientation-they supported the New Deal measures. It was more mainstream
businesses who opposed the New Deal, like medium-level industry, members of the National Association of Manufacturers and so on-because they
weren't capital-intensive, and they had large labor forces, and didn't sell to
international markets, therefore they didn't benefit particularly from New
Deal programs. But for a big corporation like G.E., it was better to have an
organized workforce that wouldn't carry out wildcat strikes, and that you
could be sure was going to work pretty regularly even if you had to pay
them a little bit more, and so on and so forth. 94 That's also why big business
has tended to support the existence of unions-American-style unions-to a
certain extent: because they know the system's going to self-destruct if
there aren't devices around to bring things under control.
As a matter of fact, one aspect of the recent shift we've seen in American
politics is that big business is not in such good shape in this respect. The
guys who took over Congress in 1994 are not pro-big business in this waythey are not the sort of people who want an organized, planned society.
See, big business is kind of Communist: they want a powerful state organizing things in their long-term interests. And the guys who came into
power with Newt Gingrich in 1994 are a somewhat different breed. They're
more like the old National Association of Manufacturers-types who
opposed the New Deal, and there's also this freakish fundamentalist
element among them, which is extremely powerful in the United States. I

Chapter Ten

393

mean, this is not so much true of Gingrich himself-Gingrich is sort of more
reasonable, he's just a flak for big business. But the people he organized are
fanatics, especially what they call the "Christian Right"-they're people who
want money tomorrow, they don't care what happens to the world two
inches down the road, they don't care what happens to anybody else, they're
deeply irrational. And they're totalitarian: despite what they say, they in
fact want a very powerful state, but only to order people around and tell
them how to live, and to throw them in jail if they step the wrong way, and
so on, a National Security State basically. Well, that's a real basis for
fascism-and big business and a lot of other powerful people are very
worried about it.
In fact, if you looked at the funding for the whole Gingrich movement, it
was quite interesting. The Wall Street Journal had an article on it after the
Congressional elections in 1994, and it turned out that the main people who
were funding them were at the fringes of the economy: I think the biggest
funder was Amway [a direct-sales company somewhat like a pyramid
scheme], which is basically a scam operation, and the other big ones were
things like "hedge funds"-not the real brokerage houses, but the ones
around the fringe of Wall Street who lend you huge amounts of money for
very risky loans. And then there was lots of money coming from gun interests, and alcohol interests, and gambling interests, and so on. I mean,
these are sectors of business where there's a ton of money, but they are not
really a part of the mainstream economy. The Gingrich group wasn't getting
its funding from General Electric, let's say. In fact, the only big corporation
that was funding them was Philip Morris [a cigarette manufacturer], and the
guys at Philip Morris are mass murderers, so they need government
protection and yeah, they'll fund Newt Gingriches.95 But if you look at who
was really backing them, it's mostly what are called "small businessmen"-they're people in the top two percent of income levels, let's say, instead of
the top one-half percent; they're what's referred to as "Main Street," like
their businesses have about fifty employees or something like that. Well,
those people really do want the government out of their hair, they don't
want a lot of regulations holding them back from making as much money
as they can.
Just to give you an example, there's a contractor painting my house right
now, and I've been talking to him-he's the kind of guy they represent. He
hates the government, because the government doesn't let him use lead in
the paint, and it makes him pay workers' compensation to his workers when
they get hurt, things like that. He just wants to get all this stuff out of his
hair so he can go out there and make money, do whatever he feels like. You
tell him, "Well, kids will die of lead poisoning if you use leaded paint." He
says, "Ahh, a lot of government bureaucrats made that up, what do they
know? I've been breathing lead all my life and look at me, I'm healthy as a
horse." That's the sort of attitude that's been supporting this movement-and
I think big business is very worried about it.

394

Understanding Power

If you want to get a sense of what it's like, Fortune magazine in its February '95 issue had a cover-story on the attitudes of C.E.O.s towards what's
been going on in Washington. These guys are worried-and the reason why
they're worried is quite simple: these C.E.O.s are what's called "liberal." I
mean, they love the fact that wages are going down, and that profits are
shooting through the roof, and that environmental laws are being loosened,
and that welfare is being cut-all that stuff is just great to them. But if you
look at some of their personal attitudes, they're about as far away from the
Christian Right as the Harvard faculty is.96 They are militantly pro-abortion
on demand. They believe in women's rights-like, they want their daughters
to have career opportunities. They don't want their kids to have to study
Lucifer and Beast 666 in school. They don't want maniacs running around
with assault rifles because the black helicopters are bringing aliens in, or
whatever the latest frenzy is. But the troops that they've mobilized are in
that domain. The so-called Christian Right, for one, just have a different
agenda. And I think big business is worried about them: the C.E.O.s don't
want that kind of fascism. And that's why by now, if you take a look, you'll
see that big corporations have tended to line up with the Clinton administration.
Take something like science policy. These "Gingrich army" -types don't
see any point in science-it's just a bunch of pointy-headed intellectuals, who
needs that? On the other hand, big corporations understand that if they want
to keep making profits five years from now, there'd better be some science
being funded today-and of course, they don't want to pay for it themselves,
they want the public to pay for it, through university science departments
and so on. They want the government to keep funding science, so when
some discovery comes along they can then rip it off and make the money
off it. Well, just a little while ago, a bunch of the big corporate heads wrote
a joint letter to the House science committee asking them to continue high
levels of funding for university-based science and research programs-just
the thing the Republican Congress wants to cut--because their job isn't just
to pour lead paint on somebody's house: these guys know that they are not
going to be in the game a couple years from now unless U.S. science
continues to produce things for them to exploit. So by this point, they are
getting very worried that these Newt Gingrich-types might go too far and
start cutting down the parts of the state system that are welfare for themwhich of course is unacceptable.
What's happened is actually pretty intriguing, if you think about it. I
mean, for the past fifty years American business has been organizing a
major class war, and they needed troops-there are votes after all, and you
can't just come before the electorate and say, "Vote for me, I'm trying to
screw you." So what they've had to do is appeal to the population on some
other grounds. Well, there aren't a lot of other grounds, and everybody
always picks the same ones, whether his name is Hitler or anything else--jingoism, racism, fear, religious fundamentalism: these are the ways of ap-

Chapter Ten

395

pealing to people if you're trying to organize a mass base of support for
policies that are really intended to crush them. And they've done it, business had to do it-and now after fifty years they've got a tiger by the tail.
Actually, the German businessmen who supported Hitler were probably
thinking about the same thing in 1937 and '38. They'd been perfectly happy
to payoff the Nazis to organize the population on the basis of fear, hatred,
racism, and jingoism, in order to beat down the German labor movement
and kill off the Communists there-but of course, once the Nazis got into
power, they had their own agenda. The big industrialists in Germany did
not want a war with the West-but by then it was too late.
Now, I don't want to say that this is Nazi Germany, but there is a similarity-just as there's a similarity to post-Khomeini Iran. I mean, Iranian
business strongly opposed the Shah [the Iranian monarch who ruled the
country until 1979], because they didn't like the fact that he controlled the
state monopolies, especially the National Iranian Oil Company-and as a
result they wanted to see him overthrown, and they needed somebody to do
it. Well, the only forces they could appeal to were the movements in the
streets, and those guys were being organized by fundamentalist clerics. So
as a result they overthrew the Shah alright, but they also got Khomeini and
all these fundamentalist maniacs running around, which they didn't like.
Well, something similar has been happening in the United States and
people are worried about it. Incidentally, I think this is also why we're now
starting to get editorials in the New York Times defending the counterculture.97 And just to tell you a personal thing, recently there was a favorable review of a book of mine in the Boston Globe. That is unbelievable.98 I
mean, it couldn't possibly have happened a couple years ago. There have
even been some discussions in the press of "class war"-that's a concept that
is usually unmentionable in the U.S.99 And I think it's because a lot of elites
are really running scared these days. They think: "Look, we've unleashed
the demon-now it's going to go after the interests of really rich people." The
only way they've been able to keep their power is by waging a huge
propaganda war, and that has now brought up guys who are like suicide
bombers, and who think that women ought to be driven back to the home
and shut up, and who want to have twelve assault rifles in their closets, and
so on. Well, they don't like that, and now they're starting to get scared.
Disturbed Populations Stirring
WOMAN: How do you think it's all going to play out, then-do you see
the American political system heading for a civil war?
Well, in general I don't think you can make predictions like that-when
we talk about predictions, we're just talking about intuitions, and mine are

396

Understanding Power

no better than anybody else's. But I do feel this period is kind of a turning
point. I mean, you can see very clearly where policy is driving people, and
you know exactly what its goals are. The only question you can't answer is
how the population is going to react as they get slammed in the face-and
they are getting slammed in the face. One way it could go would be like
the building of the C.I.O. [an integrated mass union formed in 1935], or the
Civil Rights and feminist movements, or the Freedom Rides [whites and
blacks rode buses together into the American South in 1961 to challenge
segregation laws]. Other ways it could go would be Nazism, Khomeini's
Iran, Islamic fundamentalism in Algeria-those are all ways people could go
too.
But the country is very disturbed. You can see it in polls, and you can
certainly see it traveling around-and I travel around a lot. There's complete
disaffection about everything. People don't trust anyone, they think everyone's lying to them, everyone's working for somebody else. The whole civil
society has completely broken down. And when you talk about the mood of
people-well, whether it's on right-wing talk radio, or among students, or
just among the general population, you get a very good reception these
days for the kinds of things I talk about. But it's scary-because if you came
and told people, "Clinton's organizing a U.N. army with aliens to come and
carry out genocide, you'd better go to the hills," you'd get the same favorable response. That's the problem-you'd get the same favorable response. I
mean, you can go to the most reactionary parts of the country, or anywhere
else, and a thousand people will show up to listen, and they'll be really
excited about what you're saying-no matter what it is. That's the trouble: it's
no matter what it is. Because people are so disillusioned by this point that
they will believe almost anything.
Take these guys in what are called the "militias"-I mean, obviously
they're not militias in the Second Amendment sense: "militias" are things
raised by states, these are just paramilitary organizations.100 But if you look
at who's involved in them, they are people from a sector of the population
that has really gotten it in the neck in the last twenty years: they're high
school graduates, mostly white males, a segment of the society that has really taken a beating. I mean, median real wages in the United States have
dropped about 20 percent since 1973-that's a substantial cut. 101 Their wives
now have to go to work just to put food on the table. Often their families
have broken up. Their kids are running wild, but there's no social support
system anywhere to help them deal with that. They don't read the "Fortune
500" and put together an analysis of what's really going on in the world, all
they've had rammed into their heads is, "The federal government's your
enemy." If you come to them with a political framework that could lead to
some kind of productive-change, it's all just another power-play as far as
they're concerned--and with some justice: everything else they've been told
is a crock, so why should they believe you? You tell them to read
declassified National Security Council documents, or to look at

Chapter Ten

397

things in the business press that would really mean something to them-I
mean, a lot of people don't even read. We should bear in mind how illiterate the society's become. It's tough.
So these groups certainly represent something: they're a response to
sharply worsening conditions. I mean, they're called "right-wing," but in
my view they're sort of independent of politics-there could be people on the
left in there too. All of this is not so different from people believing conspiracy theories about Kennedy's assassination, or about the Trilateral
Commission [an elite think-tank], or the C.I.A. and all the rest of that
stuff-the things that are just tearing the left to shreds.
Or take this guy called the "Unabomber" [a serial mail-bomb killer who
espoused an anti-industrial worldview]. When I read his manifesto, I thought, if I
don't know him, I know his friends-they're the kind of people I run into on the left
all the time. They're demoralized, they're fed up, they're desperate, but they don't
have a constructive response to all the problems we've got to face. Then again, the
L.A. riots [in 1992] also weren't a constructive response. In fact, all these
reactions, from the" militias," to conspiracy theories, to the Unabomber, to the
L.A. riots, they're all the result of a kind of collapse of civil society in the United
States. The vestiges of an integrated, socially cohesive, functioning society, with
some kind ) of solidarity and continuity to it, have just been destroyed here. It's
hard to imagine a better way to demoralize people than to have them watch T.V.
for seven hours a day-but that's pretty much what people have been reduced to by
now.
In fact, all of these things really illustrate the difference between completely
demoralized societies like ours and societies that are still kind of hanging
together, like in a lot of the Third World. I mean, in absolute terms
the Mayan Indians in Chiapas, Mexico [who organized the Zapatista rebellion
in 1994], are much poorer than the people in South Central Los Angeles, or in
Michigan or Montana-much poorer. But they have a civil society that hasn't
been totally eliminated the way the working-class culture we used to have in
the United States was. Chiapas is one of the most impoverished areas of the
Hemisphere, but because there's still a lively, vibrant society there, with a
cultural tradition of freedom and social organization, the Mayan Indian
peasants were able to respond in a highly constructive way-they organized the
Chiapas rebellion, they have programs and positions, they have public support, it's been going somewhere.
South Central Los Angeles, on the other hand, was just a riot: it was the reaction of a completely demoralized, devastated, poor working-class population,
with nothing at all to bring it together. All the people could do there was
mindless lashing out, just go steal from the stores. The only effect of that is,
we'll build more jails.
So to answer your question, I think it's very much up in the air what's
going to happen in the United States. See, there's an experiment going on.
The experiment is: can you marginalize a large part of the population, re-

398

Understanding Power

gard them as superfluous because they're not helping you make those dazzling profits-and can you set up a world in which production is carried out
by the most oppressed people, with the fewest rights, in the most flexible
labor markets, for the happiness of the rich people of the world? Can you
do that? Can you get women in China to work locked into factories where
they're burned to death in fires, producing toys that are sold in stores in
New York and Boston so that rich people can buy them for their children at
Christmas? 102 Can you have an economy where everything works like
that-production by the most impoverished and exploited, for the richest and
most privileged, internationally? And with large parts of the general
population just marginalized because they don't contribute to the system--in
Colombia, murdered, in New York, locked up in prison. Can you do that?
Well, nobody knows the answer to that question. You ask, could it lead to a
civil war? It definitely could, it could lead to uprisings, revolts.
The Verge of Fascism
And there are other things to worry about too, like the fact that the
United States is such an extremely fundamentalist country-and also such an
unusually frightened one. I mean, we became kind of a laughingstock to the
rest of the world during the 1980s: every time Reagan would announce
some Libyan terrorist action or something, the entire tourism industry in
Europe would collapse, because everybody in the United States was afraid
to go to Europe-where they're about a hundred times as safe as in any
American city-for fear there might be some Arab lurking around the corners there trying to kill them. That's literally the case, it became a real joke
around the world-and it's just another sign of how much extreme irrationality and fear there is in the U.S. population.
And that's a very dangerous phenomenon-because that kind of deep irrationality can readily be whipped up by demagogues, you know, Newt
Gingriches. These guys can whip up fear, hatred, they can appeal to fundamentalist urges-and that's been scaring most of the world for a while, I
should say. For example, if you recall the Republican National Convention
in 1992, it opened with a "God and Country" rally, which was televised and
seen around the world. In Europe particularly it really sent chills up
people's spines-because they remember Hitler's Nuremberg rallies, at least
older people do, and it had something of that tone. Well, the Republicans
were able to insulate the Convention from it that time around and keep
most of that stuff confined to the first night, but in the future they might not
be able to do that-in the future those people might take the Convention
over, in which case we'd be very close to some American version of
fascism; it may not be Hitler Germany, but it'll be bad enough.
It's in fact a very similar situation: Germany in the 1930s was maybe the
most civilized and advanced country in the world, though with plenty of

Chapter Ten

399

problems, and it was quite possible there to whip up hatred and fear, to mobilize people, and in fact to carry out what from their point of view was social development-with consequences that you're familiar with. Yeah, why
are we different? We've got the same genes, and the conditions in the culture which might be a part of the background for it certainly already exist.
Actually, I think that the United States has been in kind of a pre-fascist
mood for years-and we've been very lucky that every leader who's come
along has been a crook. See, people should always be very much in favor of
corruption-I'm not kidding about that. Corruption's a very good thing,
because it undermines power. I mean, if we get some Jim Bakker coming
along-you know, this preacher who was caught sleeping with everybody
and defrauding his followers-those guys are fine: all they want is money
and sex and ripping people off, so they're never going to cause much trouble. Or take Nixon, say: an obvious crook, he's ultimately not going to
cause that much of a problem. But if somebody shows up who's kind of a
Hitler-type-just wants power, no corruption, straight, makes it all sound
appealing, and says, "We want power"-well, then we'll all be in very bad
trouble. Now, we haven't had the right person yet in the United States, but
sooner or later somebody's going to fill that position-and if so, it will be
highly dangerous.
On the other hand, though, I think you can also imagine things going
quite differently. The situation just is very pliable at this point in the United
States. I mean, these same guys who are blowing up Oklahoma City government buildings [in 1995] could be doing what they would have been
doing sixty years ago, which is organizing the C.I.O.-the same guys. It really just depends on whether people start doing something about it. And
there are also other things here that are very healthy as well, and can be
built on. For instance, there's a streak of independence and opposition to
authority in the United States which probably is unique in the world. Obviously it can show up in anti-social ways, like running around with assault
rifles and so on. But it can show up in very healthy ways too, and the trick
is to make it show up in the healthy ways, like opposition to illegitimate authority.
So you know, it's complicated. Could there be a civil war? It could be
very unpleasant. A lot of very ugly things could happen, they're not inconceivable. But they're also not inevitable.
WOMAN: I've often heard you end talks by saying basically, "We can't give
up hope." But do you really see any hope-for the future of democracy, or
for the United States, or for the people in the Third World?
Well, I'll quote my friend Mike Albert [co-editor of Z Magazine], who
was listening to one of my gloomy disquisitions and said: "You know, what
you're describing is an organizer's dream." And I think that's true. The
country is in a state where people are disillusioned, frightened, skeptical,

can just see it if you look down from the plane: on one side it's brown, on
the other side it's sort of semi-green. The brown side is Haiti, the richest
place in the world. It may not last another couple decades-literally it may
become uninhabitable.
Well, that's extending elsewhere now, and it involves us too. The rich and
powerful are going to survive longer, but the effects are very real--and
they're getting worse very quickly as more and more people get
marginalized because they play no role in profit-making, which is
considered the only human value. Well, the environmental problems are
simply much more significant in scale than anything else in the past. And
there's a fair possibility-certainly a possibility high enough so that no
rational person lid exclude it-that within a couple hundred years the world's
water-level will have risen to the point that most of human life will have
been destroyed. Alright, if we don't start to do something about that now,
it's not impossible that that'll happen. In fact, it's even likely.
So whatever I happen to think, that's irrelevant. The answer to your
question is: if you remain marginalized, there's not going to be much history
to worry about. Whether people will react or not, who knows? You know?
Everyone's got to decide.

Language and Mind

study of mind. I remember quite clearly my own feeling of uneasiness as a student at the fact that, so it seemed, the basic problems of the field were solved,
and that what remained was to sharpen and improve techniques of linguistic
analysis that were reasonably well understood and to apply them to a wider
range of linguistic materials. In the postwar years, this was a dominant attitude in most active centers of research. I recall being told by a distinguished
anthropological linguist, in 1953, that he had no intention of working through
a vast collection of materials that he had assembled because within a few years
it would surely be possible to program a computer to construct a grammar from
a large corpus of data by the use of techniques that were already fairly well
formalized. At the time, this did not seem an unreasonable attitude, though the
prospect was saddening for anyone who felt, or at least hoped, that the resources
of human intelligence were somewhat deeper than these procedures and techniques might reveal. Correspondingly, there was a striking decline in studies of
linguistic method in the early 1950s as the most active theoretical minds turned
to the problem of how an essentially closed body of technique could be applied
to some new domain – say, to analysis of connected discourse, or to other cultural phenomena beyond language. I arrived at Harvard as a graduate student
shortly after B. F. Skinner had delivered his William James Lectures, later to be
published in his book Verbal Behavior. Among those active in research in the
philosophy or psychology of language, there was then little doubt that although
details were missing, and although matters could not really be quite that simple, nevertheless a behavioristic framework of the sort Skinner had outlined
would prove quite adequate to accommodate the full range of language use.
There was now little reason to question the conviction of Leonard Bloomfield,
Bertrand Russell, and positivistic linguists, psychologists, and philosophers
in general that the framework of stimulus-response psychology would soon
be extended to the point where it would provide a satisfying explanation for
the most mysterious of human abilities. The most radical souls felt that perhaps, in order to do full justice to these abilities, one must postulate little s’s
and r’s inside the brain alongside the capital S’s and R’s that were open to
immediate inspection, but this extension was not inconsistent with the general
picture.
Critical voices, even those that commanded considerable prestige, were simply unheard. For example, Karl Lashley gave a brilliant critique of the prevailing
framework of ideas in 1948, arguing that underlying language use – and all organized behavior – there must be abstract mechanisms of some sort that are not
analyzable in terms of association and that could not have been developed by
any such simple means. But his arguments and proposals, though sound and
perceptive, had absolutely no effect on the development of the field and went
by unnoticed even at his own university (Harvard), then the leading center of
psycholinguistic research. Ten years later Lashley’s contribution began to be

Linguistic contributions: past

3

appreciated, but only after his insights had been independently achieved in
another context.
The technological advances of the 1940s simply reinforced the general euphoria. Computers were on the horizon, and their imminent availability reinforced
the belief that it would suffice to gain a theoretical understanding of only the
simplest and most superficially obvious of phenomena – everything else would
merely prove to be “more of the same,” an apparent complexity that would
be disentangled by the electronic marvels. The sound spectrograph, developed
during the war, offered similar promise for the physical analysis of speech
sounds. The interdisciplinary conferences on speech analysis of the early 1950s
make interesting reading today. There were few so benighted as to question the
possibility, in fact the immediacy, of a final solution to the problem of converting speech into writing by available engineering technique. And just a few
years later, it was jubilantly discovered that machine translation and automatic
abstracting were also just around the corner. For those who sought a more
mathematical formulation of the basic processes, there was the newly developed mathematical theory of communication, which, it was widely believed in
the early 1950s, had provided a fundamental concept – the concept of “information” – that would unify the social and behavioral sciences and permit the
development of a solid and satisfactory mathematical theory of human behavior on a probabilistic base. At about the same time, the theory of automata
developed as an independent study, making use of closely related mathematical
notions. And it was linked at once, and quite properly, to earlier explorations
of the theory of neural nets. There were those – John von Neumann, for example – who felt that the entire development was dubious and shaky at best, and
probably quite misconceived, but such qualms did not go far to dispel the feeling that mathematics, technology, and behavioristic linguistics and psychology
were converging on a point of view that was very simple, very clear, and fully
adequate to provide a basic understanding of what tradition had left shrouded in
mystery.
In the United States at least, there is little trace today of the illusions of the
early postwar years. If we consider the current status of structural linguistic
methodology, stimulus-response psycholinguistics (whether or not extended to
“mediation theory”), or probabilistic or automata-theoretic models for language
use, we find that in each case a parallel development has taken place: a careful
analysis has shown that insofar as the system of concepts and principles that
was advanced can be made precise, it can be demonstrated to be inadequate
in a fundamental way. The kinds of structures that are realizable in terms of
these theories are simply not those that must be postulated to underlie the use
of language, if empirical conditions of adequacy are to be satisfied. What is
more, the character of the failure and inadequacy is such as to give little reason
to believe that these approaches are on the right track. That is, in each case it

4

Language and Mind

has been argued – quite persuasively, in my opinion – that the approach is not
only inadequate but misguided in basic and important ways. It has, I believe,
become quite clear that if we are ever to understand how language is used or
acquired, then we must abstract for separate and independent study a cognitive
system, a system of knowledge and belief, that develops in early childhood and
that interacts with many other factors to determine the kinds of behavior that
we observe; to introduce a technical term, we must isolate and study the system
of linguistic competence that underlies behavior but that is not realized in any
direct or simple way in behavior. And this system of linguistic competence
is qualitatively different from anything that can be described in terms of the
taxonomic methods of structural linguistics, the concepts of S-R psychology,
or the notions developed within the mathematical theory of communication or
the theory of simple automata. The theories and models that were developed
to describe simple and immediately given phenomena cannot incorporate the
real system of linguistic competence; “extrapolation” for simple descriptions
cannot approach the reality of linguistic competence; mental structures are
not simply “more of the same” but are qualitatively different from the complex
networks and structures that can be developed by elaboration of the concepts that
seemed so promising to many scientists just a few years ago. What is involved
is not a matter of degree of complexity but rather a quality of complexity.
Correspondingly, there is no reason to expect that the available technology
can provide significant insight or understanding or useful achievements; it has
noticeably failed to do so, and, in fact, an appreciable investment of time,
energy, and money in the use of computers for linguistic research – appreciable
by the standards of a small field like linguistics – has not provided any significant
advance in our understanding of the use or nature of language. These judgments
are harsh, but I think they are defensible. They are, furthermore, hardly debated
by active linguistic or psycholinguistic researchers.
At the same time there have been significant advances, I believe, in our
understanding of the nature of linguistic competence and some of the ways in
which it is put to use, but these advances, such as they are, have proceeded from
assumptions very different from those that were so enthusiastically put forth
in the period I have been discussing. What is more, these advances have not
narrowed the gap between what is known and what can be seen to lie beyond the
scope of present understanding and technique; rather, each advance has made
it clear that these intellectual horizons are far more remote than was heretofore
imagined. Finally, it has become fairly clear, it seems to me, that the assumptions
and approaches that appear to be productive today have a distinctly traditional
flavor to them; in general, a much despised tradition has been largely revitalized
in recent years and its contributions given some serious and, I believe, welldeserved attention. From the recognition of these facts flows the general and
quite healthy attitude of skepticism that I spoke of earlier.

Linguistic contributions: past

5

In short, it seems to me quite appropriate, at this moment in the development
of linguistics and psychology in general, to turn again to classical questions and
to ask what new insights have been achieved that bear on them, and how the
classical issues may provide direction for contemporary research and study.
When we turn to the history of study and speculation concerning the nature
of mind and, more specifically, the nature of human language, our attention
quite naturally comes to focus on the seventeenth century, “the century of
genius,” in which the foundations of modern science were firmly established
and the problems that still confound us were formulated with remarkable clarity
and perspicuity. There are many far from superficial respects in which the
intellectual climate of today resembles that of seventeenth-century Western
Europe. One, particularly crucial in the present context, is the very great interest
in the potentialities and capacities of automata, a problem that intrigued the
seventeenth-century mind as fully as it does our own. I mentioned above that
there is a slowly dawning realization that a significant gap – more accurately,
a yawning chasm – separates the system of concepts of which we have a fairly
clear grasp, on the one hand, and the nature of human intelligence, on the
other. A similar realization lies at the base of Cartesian philosophy. Descartes
also arrived, quite early in his investigations, at the conclusion that the study
of mind faces us with a problem of quality of complexity, not merely degree
of complexity. He felt that he had demonstrated that understanding and will,
the two fundamental properties of the human mind, involved capacities and
principles that are not realizable by even the most complex of automata.
It is particularly interesting to trace the development of this argument in the
works of the minor and now quite forgotten Cartesian philosophers, like Cordemoy, who wrote a fascinating treatise extending Descartes’ few remarks about
language, or La Forge, who produced a long and detailed Traité de l’esprit de
l’homme expressing, so he claimed with some reason, what Descartes would
likely have said about this subject had he lived to extend his theory of man
beyond physiology. One may question the details of this argument, and one
can show how it was impeded and distorted by certain remnants of scholastic
doctrine – the framework of substance and mode, for example. But the general
structure of the argument is not unreasonable; it is, in fact, rather analogous
to the argument against the framework of ideas of the early postwar years,
which I mentioned at the outset of this lecture. The Cartesians tried to show
that when the theory of corporeal body is sharpened and clarified and extended
to its limits, it is still incapable of accounting for facts that are obvious to
introspection and that are also confirmed by our observation of the actions of
other humans. In particular, it cannot account for the normal use of human language, just as it cannot explain the basic properties of thought. Consequently,
it becomes necessary to invoke an entirely new principle – in Cartesian terms,
to postulate a second substance whose essence is thought, alongside of body,

6

Language and Mind

with its essential properties of extension and motion. This new principle has
a “creative aspect,” which is evidenced most clearly in what we may refer
to as “the creative aspect of language use,” the distinctively human ability to
express new thoughts and to understand entirely new expressions of thought,
within the framework of an “instituted language,” a language that is a cultural product subject to laws and principles partially unique to it and partially
reflections of general properties of mind. These laws and principles, it is maintained, are not formulable in terms of even the most elaborate extension of the
concepts proper to the analysis of behavior and interaction of physical bodies, and they are not realizable by even the most complex automaton. In fact,
Descartes argued that the only sure indication that another body possesses a
human mind, that it is not a mere automaton, is its ability to use language in
the normal way; and he argued that this ability cannot be detected in an animal
or an automaton which, in other respects, shows signs of apparent intelligence
exceeding those of a human, even though such an organism or machine might be
as fully endowed as a human with the physiological organs necessary to produce
speech.
I will return to this argument and the ways in which it was developed. But
I think it is important to stress that, with all its gaps and deficiencies, it is an
argument that must be taken seriously. There is nothing at all absurd in the
conclusion. It seems to me quite possible that at that particular moment in the
development of Western thought there was the possibility for the birth of a science of psychology of a sort that still does not exist, a psychology that begins
with the problem of characterizing various systems of human knowledge and
belief, the concepts in terms of which they are organized and the principles that
underlie them, and that only then turns to the study of how these systems might
have developed through some combination of innate structure and organism –
environment interaction. Such a psychology would contrast rather sharply with
the approach to human intelligence that begins by postulating, on a priori
grounds, certain specific mechanisms that, it is claimed, must be those underlying the acquisition of all knowledge and belief. The distinction is one to which
I will return in a subsequent lecture. For the moment, I want merely to stress the
reasonableness of the rejected alternative and, what is more, its consistency with
the approach that proved so successful in the seventeenth-century revolution in
physics.
There are methodological parallels that have perhaps been inadequately
appreciated between the Cartesian postulation of a substance whose essence
was thought and the post-Newtonian acceptance of a principle of attraction
as an innate property of the ultimate corpuscles of matter, an active principle
that governs the motions of bodies. Perhaps the most far-reaching contribution
of Cartesian philosophy to modern thought was its rejection of the scholastic
notion of substantial forms and real qualities, of all those “little images fluttering

Linguistic contributions: past

7

through the air” to which Descartes referred with derision. With the exorcism
of these occult qualities, the stage was set for the rise of a physics of matter
in motion and a psychology that explored the properties of mind. But Newton
argued that Descartes’ mechanical physics wouldn’t work – the second book of
the Principia is largely devoted to this demonstration – and that it is necessary
to postulate a new force to account for the motion of bodies. The postulate
of an attractive force acting at a distance was inconsistent with the clear and
distinct ideas of common sense and could not be tolerated by an orthodox Cartesian – such a force was merely another occult quality. Newton quite agreed,
and he attempted repeatedly to find a mechanical explanation of the cause of
gravity. He rejected the view that gravity is “essential and inherent to matter”
and maintained that “to tell us that every species of things is endowed with an
occult specific property (such as gravity) by which it acts and produces manifest
effects, is to tell us nothing.” Some historians of science have suggested that
Newton hoped, like Descartes, to write a Principles of Philosophy but that his
failure to explain the cause of gravity on mechanical grounds restricted him to
a Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. Thus, to the common sense
of Newton as well as the Cartesians, physics was still not adequately grounded,
because it postulated a mystical force capable of action at a distance. Similarly,
Descartes’ postulation of mind as an explanatory principle was unacceptable to
the empiricist temper. But the astonishing success of mathematical physics carried the day against these common-sense objections, and the prestige of the new
physics was so high that the speculative psychology of the Enlightenment took
for granted the necessity of working within the Newtonian framework, rather
than on the Newtonian analogy – a very different matter. The occult force of
gravity was accepted as an obvious element of the physical world, requiring
no explanation, and it became inconceivable that one might have to postulate
entirely new principles of functioning and organization outside the framework
of what soon became the new “common sense.” Partly for this reason, the
search for an analogous scientific psychology that would explore the principles
of mind, whatever they might be, was not undertaken with the thoroughness
that was then, as now, quite possible.
I do not want to overlook a fundamental distinction between the postulation
of gravity and the postulation of a res cogitans, namely the enormous disparity
in the power of the explanatory theories that were developed. Nevertheless, I
think it is instructive to note that the reasons for the dissatisfaction of Newton,
Leibnitz, and the orthodox Cartesians with the new physics are strikingly similar
to the grounds on which a dualistic rationalist psychology was soon to be
rejected. I think it is correct to say that the study of properties and organization
of mind was prematurely abandoned, in part on quite spurious grounds, and also
to point out that there is a certain irony in the common view that its abandonment
was caused by the gradual spread of a more general “scientific” attitude.

8

Language and Mind

I have tried to call attention to some similarities between the intellectual
climate of the seventeenth century and that of today. It is illuminating, I think, to
trace in somewhat greater detail the specific course of development of linguistic
theory during the modern period, in the context of the study of mind and of
behavior in general.1
A good place to begin is with the writings of the Spanish physician Juan
Huarte, who in the late sixteenth century published a widely translated study
on the nature of human intelligence. In the course of his investigations, Huarte
came to wonder at the fact that the word for “intelligence,” ingenio, seems to
have the same Latin root as various words meaning “engender” or “generate.”
This, he argued, gives a clue to the nature of mind. Thus, “One may discern two
generative powers in man, one common with the beasts and the plants, and the
other participating of spiritual substance. Wit (Ingenio) is a generative power.
The understanding is a generative faculty.” Huarte’s etymology is actually not
very good; the insight, however, is quite substantial.
Huarte goes on to distinguish three levels of intelligence. The lowest of these
is the “docile wit,” which satisfies the maxim that he, along with Leibnitz and
many others, wrongly attributes to Aristotle, namely that there is nothing in
the mind that is not simply transmitted to it by the senses. The next higher
level, normal human intelligence, goes well beyond the empiricist limitation:
it is able to “engender within itself, by its own power, the principles on which
knowledge rests.” Normal human minds are such that “assisted by the subject
alone, without the help of anybody, they will produce a thousand conceits
they never heard spoke of . . . inventing and saying such things as they never
heard from their masters, nor any mouth.” Thus, normal human intelligence
is capable of acquiring knowledge through its own internal resources, perhaps
making use of the data of sense but going on to construct a cognitive system in
terms of concepts and principles that are developed on independent grounds;
and it is capable of generating new thoughts and of finding appropriate and
novel ways of expressing them, in ways that entirely transcend any training or
experience.
Huarte postulates a third kind of wit, “by means of which some, without
art or study, speak such subtle and surprising things, yet true, that were never
before seen, heard, or writ, no, nor ever so much as thought of.” The reference
here is to true creativity, an exercise of the creative imagination in ways that go
beyond normal intelligence and may, he felt, involve “a mixture of madness.”
Huarte maintains that the distinction between docile wit, which meets the
empiricist maxim, and normal intelligence, with its full generative capacities,
is the distinction between beast and man. As a physician, Huarte was much
1

For additional details and discussion, see my Cartesian Linguistics (New York: Harper & Row,
1966) and the references cited there.

Linguistic contributions: past

9

interested in pathology. In particular, he notes that the most severe disability
of wit that can afflict a human is a restriction to the lowest of the three levels,
to the docile wit that conforms to empiricist principles. This disability, says
Huarte, “resembles that of Eunuchs, incapable of generation.” Under these sad
circumstances, in which the intelligence can only receive stimuli transmitted
by sense and associate them with one another, true education is of course
impossible, since the ideas and principles that permit the growth of knowledge
and understanding are lacking. In this case, then, “neither the lash of the rod,
nor cries, nor method, nor examples, nor time, nor experience, nor anything in
nature can sufficiently excite him to bring forth anything.”
Huarte’s framework is useful for discussing “psychological theory” in the
ensuing period. Typical of later thought is his reference to use of language
as an index of human intelligence, of what distinguishes man from animals,
and, specifically, his emphasis on the creative capacity of normal intelligence.
These concerns dominated rationalist psychology and linguistics. With the rise
of romanticism, attention shifted to the third type of wit, to true creativity,
although the rationalist assumption that normal human intelligence is uniquely
free and creative and beyond the bounds of mechanical explanation was not
abandoned and played an important role in the psychology of romanticism, and
even in its social philosophy.
As I have already mentioned, the rationalist theory of language, which was
to prove extremely rich in insight and achievement, developed in part out of a
concern with the problem of other minds. A fair amount of effort was devoted to
a consideration of the ability of animals to follow spoken commands, to express
their emotional states, to communicate with one another, and even apparently to
cooperate for a common goal; all of this, it was argued, could be accounted for on
“mechanical grounds,” as this notion was then understood – that is, through the
functioning of physiological mechanisms in terms of which one could formulate
the properties of reflexes, conditioning and reinforcement, association, and so
on. Animals do not lack appropriate organs of communication, nor are they
simply lower along some scale of “general intelligence.”
In fact, as Descartes himself quite correctly observed, language is a speciesspecific human possession, and even at low levels of intelligence, at pathological
levels, we find a command of language that is totally unattainable by an ape
that may, in other respects, surpass a human imbecile in problem-solving ability
and other adaptive behavior. I will return later to the status of this observation,
in the light of what is now known about animal communication. There is a
basic element lacking in animals, Descartes argued, as it is lacking in even the
most complex automaton that develops its “intellectual structures” completely
in terms of conditioning and association – namely Huarte’s second type of wit,
the generative ability that is revealed in the normal human use of language
as a free instrument of thought. If by experiment we convince ourselves that

10

Language and Mind

another organism gives evidence of the normal, creative use of language, we
must suppose that it, like us, has a mind and that what it does lies beyond
the bounds of mechanical explanation, outside the framework of the stimulusresponse psychology of the time, which in relevant essentials is not significantly
different from that of today, though it falls short in sharpness of technique and
scope and reliability of information.
It should not be thought, incidentally, that the only Cartesian arguments for
the beast-machine hypothesis were those derived from the apparent inability
of animals to manifest the creative aspect of language use. There were also
many others – for example, the natural fear of population explosion in the
domains of the spirit if every gnat had a soul. Or the argument of Cardinal
Melchior de Polignac, who argued that the beast-machine hypothesis followed
from the assumption of the goodness of God, since, as he pointed out, one can
see “how much more humane is the doctrine that animals suffer no pain.”2 Or
there is the argument of Louis Racine, son of the dramatist, who was struck
by the following insight: “If beasts had souls and were capable of feelings,
would they show themselves insensible to the affront and injustice done them
by Descartes? Would they not rather have risen up in wrath against the leader
and the sect which so degraded them?” One should add, I suppose, that Louis
Racine was regarded by his contemporaries as the living proof that a brilliant
father could not have a brilliant son. But the fact is that the discussion of the
existence of other minds, and, in contrast, the mechanical nature of animals,
continually returned to the creative aspect of language use, to the claim that – as
formulated by another minor seventeenth-century figure – “if beasts reasoned,
they would be capable of true speech with its infinite variety.”
It is important to understand just what properties of language were most striking to Descartes and his followers. The discussion of what I have been calling
“the creative aspect of language use” turns on three important observations. The
first is that the normal use of language is innovative, in the sense that much of
what we say in the course of normal language use is entirely new, not a repetition of anything that we have heard before and not even similar in pattern – in
any useful sense of the terms “similar” and “pattern” – to sentences or discourse
that we have heard in the past. This is a truism, but an important one, often overlooked and not infrequently denied in the behaviorist period of linguistics to
which I referred earlier, when it was almost universally claimed that a person’s
knowledge of language is representable as a stored set of patterns, overlearned
through constant repetition and detailed training, with innovation being at most
a matter of “analogy.” The fact surely is, however, that the number of sentences
2

These examples are taken from the excellent study by Leonora Cohen Rosenfield, From BeastMachine to Man-Machine (New York: Oxford University Press, 1941). The quotes are her paraphrases of the original.

Linguistic contributions: past

11

in one’s native language that one will immediately understand with no feeling
of difficulty or strangeness is astronomical; and that the number of patterns
underlying our normal use of language and corresponding to meaningful and
easily comprehensible sentences in our language is orders of magnitude greater
than the number of seconds in a lifetime. It is in this sense that the normal use
of language is innovative.
However, in the Cartesian view even animal behavior is potentially infinite
in its variety, in the special sense in which the readings of a speedometer can be
said, with an obvious idealization, to be potentially infinite in variety. That is,
if animal behavior is controlled by external stimuli or internal states (the latter
including those established by conditioning), then as the stimuli vary over an
indefinite range, so may the behavior of the animal. But the normal use of
language is not only innovative and potentially infinite in scope, but also free
from the control of detectable stimuli, either external or internal. It is because
of this freedom from stimulus control that language can serve as an instrument
of thought and self-expression, as it does not only for the exceptionally gifted
and talented, but also, in fact, for every normal human.
Still, the properties of being unbounded and free from stimulus control do
not, in themselves, exceed the bounds of mechanical explanation. And Cartesian
discussion of the limits of mechanical explanation therefore took note of a third
property of the normal use of language, namely its coherence and its “appropriateness to the situation” – which of course is an entirely different matter from
control by external stimuli. Just what “appropriateness” and “coherence” may
consist in we cannot say in any clear or definite way, but there is no doubt that
these are meaningful concepts. We can distinguish normal use of language from
the ravings of a maniac or the output of a computer with a random element.
Honesty forces us to admit that we are as far today as Descartes was three
centuries ago from understanding just what enables a human to speak in a
way that is innovative, free from stimulus control, and also appropriate and
coherent. This is a serious problem that the psychologist and biologist must
ultimately face and that cannot be talked out of existence by invoking “habit”
or “conditioning” or “natural selection.”
The Cartesian analysis of the problem of other minds, in terms of the creative aspect of language use and similar indications of the limits of mechanical
explanation, was not entirely satisfying to contemporary opinion – Bayle’s
Dictionary, for example, cites the inability to give a satisfactory proof of the
existence of other minds as the weakest element in the Cartesian philosophy –
and there was a long and intriguing series of discussions and polemics regarding the problems that Descartes raised. From the vantage point of several centuries, we can see that the debate was inconclusive. The properties of human
thought and human language emphasized by the Cartesians are real enough; they
were then, as they are now, beyond the bounds of any well-understood kind of

12

Language and Mind

physical explanation. Neither physics nor biology nor psychology gives us any
clue as to how to deal with these matters.
As in the case of other intractable problems, it is tempting to try another
approach, one that might show the problem to be misconceived, the result of
some conceptual confusion. This is a line of argument that has been followed in
contemporary philosophy, but, it seems to me, without success. It is clear that the
Cartesians understood, as well as Gilbert Ryle and other contemporary critics
understand, the difference between providing criteria for intelligent behavior, on
the one hand, and providing an explanation for the possibility of such behavior,
on the other; but, as distinct from Ryle, they were interested in the latter problem
as well as the former. As scientists, they were not satisfied with the formulation
of experimental tests that would show the behavior of another organism to be
creative, in the special sense just outlined; they were also troubled, and quite
rightly so, by the fact that the abilities indicated by such tests and observational
criteria transcended the capacities of corporeal bodies as they understood them,
just as they are beyond the scope of physical explanation as we understand it
today. There is surely nothing illegitimate in an attempt to go beyond elaboration
of observational tests and collection of evidence to the construction of some theoretical explanation for what is observed, and this is just what was at stake in the
Cartesian approach to the problem of mind. As La Forge and others insisted, it
is necessary to go beyond what one can perceive or “imagine” (in the technical,
classical sense of this term) if one hopes to understand the nature of “l’esprit de
l’homme,” just as Newton did – successfully – in trying to understand the nature
of planetary motion. On the other hand, the proposals of the Cartesians were
themselves of no real substance; the phenomena in question are not explained
satisfactorily by attributing them to an “active principle” called “mind,” the
properties of which are not developed in any coherent or comprehensive
way.
It seems to me that the most hopeful approach today is to describe the phenomena of language and of mental activity as accurately as possible, to try to
develop an abstract theoretical apparatus that will as far as possible account for
these phenomena and reveal the principles of their organization and functioning,
without attempting, for the present, to relate the postulated mental structures
and processes to any physiological mechanisms or to interpret mental function
in terms of “physical causes.” We can only leave open for the future the question of how these abstract structures and processes are realized or accounted
for in some concrete terms, conceivably in terms that are not within the range
of physical processes as presently understood – a conclusion that, if correct,
should surprise no one.
This rationalist philosophy of language merged with various other independent developments in the seventeenth century, leading to the first really significant general theory of linguistic structure, namely the general point of view that

Linguistic contributions: past

13

came to be known as “philosophical” or “universal” grammar. Unfortunately,
philosophical grammar is very poorly known today. There are few technical or
scholarly studies, and these few are apologetic and disparaging. References to
philosophical grammar in modern treatises on language are so distorted as to
be quite worthless. Even a scholar with such high standards as Leonard Bloomfield gives an account of philosophical grammar in his major work, Language,
that bears almost no resemblance to the original and attributes to this tradition
views diametrically opposed to those that were most typical of it. For example,
Bloomfield and many others describe philosophical grammar as based on a
Latin model, as prescriptive, as showing no interest in the sounds of speech, as
given to a confusion of speech with writing. All these charges are false, and it
is important to dispel these myths to make possible an objective evaluation of
what was actually accomplished.
It is particularly ironic that philosophical grammar should be accused of a
Latin bias. In fact, it is significant that the original works – the Port-Royal
Grammar and Logic, in particular – were written in French, the point being that
they formed part of the movement to replace Latin by the vernacular. The fact
is that Latin was regarded as an artificial and distorted language, one positively
injurious to the exercise of the plain thinking and common-sense discourse by
which the Cartesians set such store. The practitioners of philosophical grammar
used such linguistic materials as were available to them; it is noteworthy that
some of the topics that were studied with the greatest care and persistence
for well over a century involved points of grammar that do not even have
an analogue in Latin. A striking example is the so-called rule of Vaugelas,
which involves the relation between indefinite articles and relative clauses in
French. For 150 years the rule of Vaugelas was the central issue debated in the
controversy over the possibility of developing a “rational grammar,” one which
would go beyond description to achieve a rational explanation for phenomena.
No doubt it is a complete misunderstanding of the issue of rational explanation that leads to the charge of “prescriptivism” that is leveled, quite erroneously,
against philosophical grammar. In fact, there is no issue of prescriptivism. It
was well understood and frequently reiterated that the facts of usage are what
they are, and that it is not the place of the grammarian to legislate. At stake was
an entirely different matter, namely the problem of accounting for the facts of
usage on the basis of explanatory hypotheses concerning the nature of language
and, ultimately, the nature of human thought. Philosophical grammarians had
little interest in the accumulation of data, except insofar as such data could be
used as evidence bearing on deeper processes of great generality. The contrast,
then, is not between descriptive and prescriptive grammar, but between description and explanation, between grammar as “natural history” and grammar as a
kind of “natural philosophy” or, in modern terms, “natural science.” A largely
irrational objection to explanatory theories as such has made it difficult for

14

Language and Mind

modern linguistics to appreciate what was actually at stake in these developments and has led to a confusion of philosophical grammar with the effort to
teach better manners to a rising middle class.
The whole matter is not without interest. I mentioned earlier that there are
striking similarities between the seventeenth-century climate of opinion and that
of contemporary cognitive psychology and linguistics. One point of similarity
has to do with precisely this matter of explanatory theory. Philosophical grammar, very much like current generative grammar, developed in self-conscious
opposition to a descriptive tradition that interpreted the task of the grammarian
to be merely that of recording and organizing the data of usage – a kind of
natural history. It maintained – quite correctly, I believe – that such a restriction
was debilitating and unnecessary and that, whatever justification it may have,
it has nothing to do with the method of science – which is typically concerned
with data not for itself but as evidence for deeper, hidden organizing principles,
principles that cannot be detected “in the phenomena” nor derived from them by
taxonomic data-processing operations, any more than the principles of celestial
mechanics could have been developed in conformity with such strictures.
Contemporary scholarship is not in a position to give a definitive assessment
of the achievements of philosophical grammar. The ground-work has not been
laid for such an assessment, the original work is all but unknown in itself, and
much of it is almost unobtainable. For example, I have been unable to locate a
single copy, in the United States, of the only critical edition of the Port-Royal
Grammar, produced over a century ago; and although the French original is
now once again available,3 the one English translation of this important work
is apparently to be found only in the British Museum. It is a pity that this work
should have been so totally disregarded, since what little is known about it is
intriguing and quite illuminating.
This is not the place to attempt a preliminary assessment of this work or
even to sketch its major outlines as they now appear, on the basis of present,
quite inadequate knowledge. However, I do want to mention at least a few of
the persistent themes. It seems that one of the innovations of the Port-Royal
Grammar of 1660 – the work that initiated the tradition of philosophical grammar – was its recognition of the importance of the notion of the phrase as a
grammatical unit. Earlier grammar had been largely a grammar of word classes
and inflections. In the Cartesian theory of Port-Royal, a phrase corresponds to
a complex idea and a sentence is subdivided into consecutive phrases, which
are further subdivided into phrases, and so on, until the level of the word is
reached. In this way we derive what might be called the “surface structure” of
the sentence in question. To use what became a standard example, the sentence
“Invisible God created the visible world” contains the subject “invisible God”
3

Menston, England: Scolar Press Limited, 1967.

Linguistic contributions: past

15

and the predicate “created the visible world,” the latter contains the complex
idea “the visible world” and the verb “created,” and so on. But it is interesting
that although the Port-Royal Grammar is apparently the first to rely in a fairly
systematic way on analysis into surface structure, it also recognized the inadequacy of such analysis. According to the Port-Royal theory, surface structure
corresponds only to sound – to the corporeal aspect of language; but when the
signal is produced, with its surface structure, there takes place a corresponding
mental analysis into what we may call the deep structure, a formal structure
that relates directly not to the sound but to the meaning. In the example just
given, “Invisible God created the visible world,” the deep structure consists
of a system of three propositions, “that God is invisible,” “that he created the
world,” “that the world is visible.” The propositions that interrelate to form the
deep structure are not, of course, asserted when the sentence is used to make
a statement; if I say that a wise man is honest, I am not asserting that men
are wise or honest, even though in the Port-Royal theory the propositions “a
man is wise” and “a man is honest” enter into the deep structure. Rather, these
propositions enter into the complex ideas that are present to the mind, though
rarely articulated in the signal, when the sentence is uttered.
The deep structure is related to the surface structure by certain mental operations – in modern terminology, by grammatical transformations. Each language
can be regarded as a particular relation between sound and meaning. Following
the Port-Royal theory to its logical conclusions, then, the grammar of a language
must contain a system of rules that characterizes deep and surface structures
and the transformational relation between them, and – if it is to accommodate
the creative aspect of language use – that does so over an infinite domain of
paired deep and surface structures. To use the terminology Wilhelm von Humboldt used in the 1830s, the speaker makes infinite use of finite means. His
grammar must, then, contain a finite system of rules that generates infinitely
many deep and surface structures, appropriately related. It must also contain
rules that relate these abstract structures to certain representations of sound and
meaning – representations that, presumably, are constituted of elements that
belong to universal phonetics and universal semantics, respectively. In essence,
this is the concept of grammatical structure as it is being developed and elaborated today. Its roots are clearly to be found in the classical tradition that I am
now discussing, and the basic concepts were explored with some success in this
period.
The theory of deep and surface structure seems straightforward enough, at
least in rough outline. Nevertheless, it was rather different from anything that
preceded it, and, somewhat more surprising, it disappeared almost without a
trace as modern linguistics developed in the late nineteenth century. I want to
say just a word about the relationship of the theory of deep and surface structure
to earlier and later thinking about language.

16

Language and Mind

There is a similarity, which I think can be highly misleading, between the
theory of deep and surface structure and a much older tradition. The practitioners of philosophical grammar were very careful to stress this similarity
in their detailed development of the theory and had no hesitation in expressing
their debt to classical grammar as well as to such major figures of renaissance
grammar as the Spanish scholar Sanctius. Sanctius, in particular, had developed
a theory of ellipsis that had great influence on philosophical grammar. As I have
already remarked, philosophical grammar is poorly understood today. But such
antecedents as Sanctius have fallen into total oblivion. Furthermore, as in the
case of all such work, there is a problem of determining not only what he said
but also, more importantly, what he meant.
There is no doubt that in developing his concept of ellipsis as a fundamental
property of language, Sanctius gave many linguistic examples that superficially are closely parallel to those that were used to develop the theory of deep
and surface structure, both in classical philosophical grammar and in its far
more explicit modern variants. It means, however, that the concept of ellipsis is
intended by Sanctius merely as a device for the interpretation of texts. Thus, to
determine the true meaning of an actual literary passage one must very often,
according to Sanctius, regard it as an elliptical variant of a more elaborate paraphrase. But the Port-Royal theory and its later development, particularly at the
hands of the encyclopedist Du Marsais, gave a rather different interpretation to
ellipsis. The clear intent of philosophical grammar was to develop a psychological theory, not a technique of textual interpretation. The theory holds that the
underlying deep structure, with its abstract organization of linguistic forms, is
“present to the mind,” as the signal, with its surface structure, is produced or
perceived by the bodily organs. And the transformational operations relating
deep and surface structure are actual mental operations, performed by the mind
when a sentence is produced or understood. The distinction is fundamental.
Under the latter interpretation, it follows that there must be, represented in the
mind, a fixed system of generative principles that characterize and associate
deep and surface structures in some definite way – a grammar, in other words,
that is used in some fashion as discourse is produced or interpreted. This grammar represents the underlying linguistic competence to which I referred earlier.
The problem of determining the character of such grammars and the principles
that govern them is a typical problem of science, perhaps very difficult, but in
principle admitting of definite answers that are right or wrong as they do or do
not correspond to the mental reality. But the theory of ellipsis as a technique of
textual interpretation need not consist of a set of principles represented somehow in the mind as an aspect of normal human competence and intelligence.
Rather, it can be in part ad hoc and can involve many cultural and personal
factors relevant to the literary work under analysis.

Linguistic contributions: past

17

The Port-Royal theory of deep and surface structure belongs to psychology
as an attempt to elaborate Huarte’s second type of wit, as an exploration of the
properties of normal human intelligence. The concept of ellipsis in Sanctius,
if I understand it correctly, is one of many techniques, to be applied as conditions warrant and having no necessary mental representation as an aspect of a
normal intelligence. Although the linguistic examples used are often similar,
the context in which they are introduced and the framework in which they fit
are fundamentally different; in particular, they are separated by the Cartesian
revolution. I propose this with some diffidence, because of the obscurity of the
relevant texts and their intellectual backgrounds, but this interpretation seems
to me correct.
The relation of the Port-Royal theory to modern structural and descriptive
linguistics is somewhat clearer. The latter restricts itself to the analysis of what
I have called surface structure, to formal properties that are explicit in the signal
and to phrases and units that can be determined from the signal by techniques
of segmentation and classification. This restriction is a perfectly self-conscious
one, and it was regarded – I believe quite erroneously – as a great advance. The
great Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure, who at the turn of the century laid
the groundwork for modern structural linguistics, put forth the view that the
only proper methods of linguistic analysis are segmentation and classification.
Applying these methods, the linguist determines the patterns into which the
units so analyzed fall, where these patterns are either syntagmatic – that is,
patterns of literal succession in the stream of speech – or paradigmatic – that is,
relations among units that occupy the same position in the stream of speech. He
held that when all such analysis is complete, the structure of the language is, of
necessity, completely revealed, and the science of linguistics will have realized
its task completely. Evidently, such taxonomic analysis leaves no place for
deep structure in the sense of philosophical grammar. For example, the system
of three propositions underlying the sentence “Invisible God created the visible
world” cannot be derived from this sentence by segmentation and classification
of segmented units, nor can the transformational operations relating the deep
and surface structure, in this case, be expressed in terms of paradigmatic and
syntagmatic structures. Modern structural linguistics has been faithful to these
limitations, which were held to be necessary limitations.
In fact, Saussure in some respects even went beyond this in departing from
the tradition of philosophical grammar. He occasionally expressed the view that
processes of sentence formation do not belong to the system of language at all
– that the system of language is restricted to such linguistic units as sounds
and words and perhaps a few fixed phrases and a small number of very general
patterns; the mechanisms of sentence formation are otherwise free from any
constraint imposed by linguistic structure as such. Thus, in his terms, sentence

18

Language and Mind

formation is not strictly a matter of langue, but is rather assigned to what he
called parole, and thus placed outside the scope of linguistics proper; it is a
process of free creation, unconstrained by linguistic rule except insofar as such
rules govern the forms of words and the patterns of sounds. Syntax, in this
view, is a rather trivial matter. And, in fact, there is very little work in syntax
throughout the period of structural linguistics.
In taking this position, Saussure echoed an important critique of Humboldtian linguistic theory by the distinguished American linguist William Dwight
Whitney, who evidently greatly influenced Saussure. According to Whitney,
Humboldtian linguistic theory, which in many ways extended the Cartesian
views that I have been discussing, was fundamentally in error. Rather, a language is simply “made up of a vast number of items, each of which has its
own time, occasion, and effect.” He maintained that “language in the concrete
sense . . . is . . . the sum of words and phrases by which any man expresses his
thought”; the task of the linguist, then, is to list these linguistic forms and to
study their individual histories. In contrast to philosophical grammar, Whitney
argued that there is nothing universal about the form of language and that one
can learn nothing about the general properties of human intelligence from the
study of the arbitrary agglomeration of forms that constitutes a human language.
As he put it, “The infinite diversity of human speech ought alone to be a sufficient bar to the assertion that an understanding of the powers of the soul involves
the explanation of speech.” Similarly, Delbrück, in the standard work on IndoEuropean comparative syntax, denounced traditional grammar for having set
up ideal sentence types underlying the observed signals, referring to Sanctius
as the “major dogmatist in this domain.”
With the expression of such sentiments as these, we enter the modern age of
the study of language. The death-knell of philosophical grammar was sounded
with the remarkable successes of comparative Indo-European studies, which
surely rank among the outstanding achievements of nineteenth-century science.
The impoverished and thoroughly inadequate conception of language expressed
by Whitney and Saussure and numerous others proved to be entirely appropriate
to the current stage of linguistic research. As a result, this conception was
held to be vindicated, a not unnatural but thoroughly mistaken conviction.
Modern structural-descriptive linguistics developed within the same intellectual
framework and also made substantial progress, to which I will return directly.
In contrast, philosophical grammar did not provide appropriate concepts for
the new comparative grammar or for the study of exotic languages unknown
to the investigator, and it was, in a sense, exhausted. It had reached the limits
of what could be achieved within the framework of the ideas and techniques
that were available. There was no clear understanding a century ago as to how
one might proceed to construct generative grammars that “make infinite use
of finite means” and that express the “organic form” of human language, “that

Linguistic contributions: past

19

marvellous invention” (in the words of the Port-Royal Grammar ) “by which we
construct from twenty-five or thirty sounds an infinity of expressions, which,
having no resemblance in themselves to what takes place in our minds, still
enable us to let others know the secret of what we conceive and of all the
various mental activities that we carry out.”
Thus, the study of language had arrived at a situation in which there was, on
the one hand, a set of simple concepts that provided the basis for some startling
successes and, on the other, some deep but rather vague ideas that did not
seem to lead to any further productive research. The outcome was inevitable
and not at all to be deplored. There developed a professionalization of the
field, a shift of interest away from the classical problems of general interest to
intellectuals like Arnauld and Humboldt, for example, toward a new domain
largely defined by the techniques that the profession itself has forged in the
solution of certain problems. Such a development is natural and quite proper,
but not without its dangers. Without wishing to exalt the cult of gentlemanly
amateurism, one must nevertheless recognize that the classical issues have a
liveliness and significance that may be lacking in an area of investigation that
is determined by the applicability of certain tools and methods, rather than by
problems that are of intrinsic interest in themselves.
The moral is not to abandon useful tools; rather, it is, first, that one should
maintain enough perspective to be able to detect the arrival of that inevitable day
when the research that can be conducted with these tools is no longer important;
and, second, that one should value ideas and insights that are to the point, though
perhaps premature and vague and not productive of research at a particular stage
of technique and understanding. With the benefits of hindsight, I think we can
now see clearly that the disparagement and neglect of a rich tradition proved
in the long run to be quite harmful to the study of language. Furthermore, this
disparagement and neglect were surely unnecessary. Perhaps it would have been
psychologically difficult, but there is no reason in principle why the successful
exploitation of the structuralist approach in historical and descriptive study
could not have been coupled with a clear recognition of its essential limitations
and its ultimate inadequacy, in comparison with the tradition it temporarily, and
quite justifiably, displaced. Here, I think, lies a lesson that may be valuable for
the future study of language and mind.
To conclude, I think there have been two really productive traditions of
research that have unquestionable relevance to anyone concerned with the study
of language today. One is the tradition of philosophical grammar that flourished
from the seventeenth century through romanticism; the second is the tradition
that I have rather misleadingly been referring to as “structuralist,” which has
dominated research for the past century, at least until the early 1950s. I have
dwelt on the achievements of the former because of their unfamiliarity as well as
their contemporary relevance. Structural linguistics has enormously broadened

20

Language and Mind

the scope of information available to us and has extended immeasurably the
reliability of such data. It has shown that there are structural relations in language
that can be studied abstractly. It has raised the precision of discourse about
language to entirely new levels. But I think that its major contribution may
prove to be one for which, paradoxically, it has been very severely criticized.
I refer to the careful and serious attempt to construct “discovery procedures,”
those techniques of segmentation and classification to which Saussure referred.
This attempt was a failure – I think that is now generally understood. It was a
failure because such techniques are at best limited to the phenomena of surface
structure and cannot, therefore, reveal the mechanisms that underlie the creative
aspect of language use and the expression of semantic content. But what remains
of fundamental importance is that this attempt was directed to the basic question
in the study of language, which was for the first time formulated in a clear and
intelligible way. The problem raised is that of specifying the mechanisms that
operate on the data of sense and produce knowledge of language – linguistic
competence. It is obvious that such mechanisms exist. Children do learn a first
language; the language that they learn is, in the traditional sense, an “instituted
language,” not an innately specified system. The answer that was proposed in
structural linguistic methodology has been shown to be incorrect, but this is of
small importance when compared with the fact that the problem itself has now
received a clear formulation.
Whitehead once described the mentality of modern science as having been
forged through “the union of passionate interest in the detailed facts with equal
devotion to abstract generalization.” It is roughly accurate to describe modern
linguistics as passionately interested in detailed fact, and philosophical grammar
as equally devoted to abstract generalization. It seems to me that the time has
arrived to unite these two major currents and to develop a synthesis that will
draw from their respective achievements. In the next two lectures, I will try
to illustrate how the tradition of philosophical grammar can be reconstituted
and turned to new and challenging problems and how one can, finally, return
in a productive way to the basic questions and concerns that gave rise to this
tradition.

2

Linguistic contributions to the study of mind:
present

One difficulty in the psychological sciences lies in the familiarity of the phenomena with which they deal. A certain intellectual effort is required to see
how such phenomena can pose serious problems or call for intricate explanatory theories. One is inclined to take them for granted as necessary or somehow
“natural.”
The effects of this familiarity of phenomena have often been discussed.
Wolfgang Köhler, for example, has suggested that psychologists do not open up
“entirely new territories” in the manner of the natural sciences, “simply because
man was acquainted with practically all territories of mental life a long time
before the founding of scientific psychology . . . because at the very beginning of their work there were no entirely unknown mental facts left which they
could have discovered.”1 The most elementary discoveries of classical physics
have a certain shock value – man has no intuition about elliptical orbits or the
gravitational constant. But “mental facts” of even a much deeper sort cannot
be “discovered” by the psychologist, because they are a matter of intuitive
acquaintance and, once pointed out, are obvious.
There is also a more subtle effect. Phenomena can be so familiar that we
really do not see them at all, a matter that has been much discussed by literary
theorists and philosophers. For example, Viktor Shklovskij in the early 1920s
developed the idea that the function of poetic art is that of “making strange”
the object depicted. “People living at the seashore grow so accustomed to the
murmur of the waves that they never hear it. By the same token, we scarcely
ever hear the words which we utter . . . We look at each other, but we do not see
each other any more. Our perception of the world has withered away; what has
remained is mere recognition.” Thus, the goal of the artist is to transfer what
is depicted to the “sphere of new perception”; as an example, Shklovskij cites
a story by Tolstoy in which social customs and institutions are “made strange”
by the device of presenting them from the viewpoint of a narrator who happens
to be a horse.2
1
2

W. Köhler, Dynamics in Psychology (New York: Liveright, 1940).
See V. Ehrlich, Russian Formalism, 2nd rev. edn. (New York: Humanities, 1965), pp. 176–77.

21

22

Language and Mind

The observation that “we look at each other, but we do not see each other
any more” has perhaps itself achieved the status of “words which we utter but
scarcely ever hear.” But familiarity, in this case as well, should not obscure the
importance of the insight.
Wittgenstein makes a similar observation, pointing out that “the aspects of
things that are most important for us are hidden because of their simplicity and
familiarity (one is unable to notice something – because it is always before
one’s eyes).”3 He sets himself to “supplying . . . remarks on the natural history
of human beings: we are not contributing curiosities however, but observations
which no one has doubted, but which have escaped remark only because they
are always before our eyes.”4
Less noticed is the fact that we also lose sight of the need for explanation
when phenomena are too familiar and “obvious.” We tend too easily to assume
that explanations must be transparent and close to the surface. The greatest
defect of classical philosophy of mind, both rationalist and empiricist, seems to
me to be its unquestioned assumption that the properties and content of the mind
are accessible to introspection; it is surprising to see how rarely this assumption
has been challenged, insofar as the organization and function of the intellectual
faculties are concerned, even with the Freudian revolution. Correspondingly,
the far-reaching studies of language that were carried out under the influence of
Cartesian rationalism suffered from a failure to appreciate either the abstractness
of those structures that are “present to the mind” when an utterance is produced
or understood, or the length and complexity of the chain of operations that relate
the mental structures expressing the semantic content of the utterance to the
physical realization.
A similar defect mars the study of language and mind in the modern period.
It seems to me that the essential weakness in the structuralist and behaviorist
approaches to these topics is the faith in the shallowness of explanations, the
belief that the mind must be simpler in its structure than any known physical
organ and that the most primitive of assumptions must be adequate to explain
whatever phenomena can be observed. Thus, it is taken for granted without
argument or evidence (or is presented as true by definition) that a language
is a “habit structure” or a network of associative connections, or that knowledge of language is merely a matter of “knowing how,” a skill expressible
as a system of dispositions to respond. Accordingly, knowledge of language
must develop slowly through repetition and training, its apparent complexity
resulting from the proliferation of very simple elements rather than from deeper
principles of mental organization that may be as inaccessible to introspection
3
4

Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations (New York: Oxford University Press, 1953),
Section 129.
Ibid., Section 415.

Linguistic contributions: present

23

as the mechanisms of digestion or coordinated movement. Although there is
nothing inherently unreasonable in an attempt to account for knowledge and
use of language in these terms, it also has no particular plausibility or a priori
justification. There is no reason to react with uneasiness or disbelief if study of
the knowledge of language and use of this knowledge should lead in an entirely
different direction.
I think that in order to achieve progress in the study of language and human
cognitive faculties in general it is necessary first to establish “psychic distance”
from the “mental facts” to which Köhler referred, and then to explore the
possibilities for developing explanatory theories, whatever they may suggest
with regard to the complexity and abstractness of the underlying mechanisms.
We must recognize that even the most familiar phenomena require explanation and that we have no privileged access to the underlying mechanisms, no
more so than in physiology or physics. Only the most preliminary and tentative hypotheses can be offered concerning the nature of language, its use, and
its acquisition. As native speakers, we have a vast amount of data available to
us. For just this reason it is easy to fall into the trap of believing that there is
nothing to be explained, that whatever organizing principles and underlying
mechanisms may exist must be “given” as the data is given. Nothing could be
further from the truth, and an attempt to characterize precisely the system of
rules we have mastered that enables us to understand new sentences and produce
a new sentence on an appropriate occasion will quickly dispel any dogmatism
on this matter. The search for explanatory theories must begin with an attempt
to determine these systems of rules and to reveal the principles that govern
them.
The person who has acquired knowledge of a language has internalized a
system of rules that relate sound and meaning in a particular way. The linguist
constructing a grammar of a language is in effect proposing a hypothesis concerning this internalized system. The linguist’s hypothesis, if presented with
sufficient explicitness and precision, will have certain empirical consequences
with regard to the form of utterances and their interpretations by the native
speaker. Evidently, knowledge of language – the internalized system of rules –
is only one of the many factors that determine how an utterance will be used
or understood in a particular situation. The linguist who is trying to determine
what constitutes knowledge of a language – to construct a correct grammar –
is studying one fundamental factor that is involved in performance, but not the
only one. This idealization must be kept in mind when one is considering the
problem of confirmation of grammars on the basis of empirical evidence. There
is no reason why one should not also study the interaction of several factors
involved in complex mental acts and underlying actual performance, but such a
study is not likely to proceed very far unless the separate factors are themselves
fairly well understood.

24

Language and Mind

In a good sense, the grammar proposed by the linguist is an explanatory
theory; it suggests an explanation for the fact that (under the idealization mentioned) a speaker of the language in question will perceive, interpret, form, or
use an utterance in certain ways and not in other ways. One can also search
for explanatory theories of a deeper sort. The native speaker has acquired a
grammar on the basis of very restricted and degenerate evidence; the grammar
has empirical consequences that extend far beyond the evidence. At one level,
the phenomena with which the grammar deals are explained by the rules of
the grammar itself and the interaction of these rules. At a deeper level, these
same phenomena are explained by the principles that determine the selection of
the grammar on the basis of the restricted and degenerate evidence available to
the person who has acquired knowledge of the language, who has constructed
for himself this particular grammar. The principles that determine the form of
grammar and that select a grammar of the appropriate form on the basis of
certain data constitute a subject that might, following a traditional usage, be
termed “universal grammar.” The study of universal grammar, so understood,
is a study of the nature of human intellectual capacities. It tries to formulate the
necessary and sufficient conditions that a system must meet to qualify as a potential human language, conditions that are not accidentally true of the existing
human languages, but that are rather rooted in the human “language capacity,”
and thus constitute the innate organization that determines what counts as linguistic experience and what knowledge of language arises on the basis of this
experience. Universal grammar, then, constitutes an explanatory theory of a
much deeper sort than particular grammar, although the particular grammar of
a language can also be regarded as an explanatory theory.5
In practice, the linguist is always involved in the study of both universal and
particular grammar. When he constructs a descriptive, particular grammar in
one way rather than another on the basis of what evidence he has available, he is
guided, consciously or not, by certain assumptions as to the form of grammar,
and these assumptions belong to the theory of universal grammar. Conversely,
his formulation of principles of universal grammar must be justified by the study
of their consequences when applied in particular grammars. Thus, at several
levels the linguist is involved in the construction of explanatory theories, and
at each level there is a clear psychological interpretation for his theoretical
and descriptive work. At the level of particular grammar, he is attempting to
characterize knowledge of a language, a certain cognitive system that has been
developed – unconsciously, of course – by the normal speaker–hearer. At the
level of universal grammar, he is trying to establish certain general properties
5

To bring out this difference in depth of explanation, I have suggested in my Current Issues in
Linguistic Theory (New York: Humanities, 1965) that the term “level of descriptive adequacy”
might be used for the study of the relation between grammars and data and the term “level of
explanatory adequacy” for the relation between a theory of universal grammar and these data.

Linguistic contributions: present

25

of human intelligence. Linguistics, so characterized, is simply the subfield of
psychology that deals with these aspects of mind.
I will try to give some indication of the kind of work now in progress that aims,
on the one hand, to determine the systems of rules that constitute knowledge of
a language, and on the other, to reveal the principles that govern these systems.
Obviously, any conclusions that can be reached today regarding particular or
universal grammar must be quite tentative and restricted in their coverage. And
in a brief sketch such as this only the roughest outlines can be indicated. To try
to give something of the flavor of what is being done today I will concentrate
on problems that are current in that they can be formulated with some clarity
and studied, though they still resist solution.
As I indicated in the first lecture, I believe that the most appropriate general
framework for the study of problems of language and mind is the system of ideas
developed as part of the rationalist psychology of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, elaborated in important respects by the romantics and then largely
forgotten as attention shifted to other matters. According to this traditional
conception, a system of propositions expressing the meaning of a sentence
is produced in the mind as the sentence is realized as a physical signal, the
two being related by certain formal operations that, in current terminology, we
may call grammatical transformations. Continuing with current terminology,
we can thus distinguish the surface structure of the sentence, the organization
into categories and phrases that is directly associated with the physical signal,
from the underlying deep structure, also a system of categories and phrases,
but with a more abstract character. Thus, the surface structure of the sentence
“A wise man is honest” might analyze it into the subject “a wise man” and the
predicate “is honest.” The deep structure, however, will be rather different. It
will, in particular, extract from the complex idea that constitutes the subject
of the surface structure an underlying proposition with the subject “man” and
the predicate “be wise.” In fact, the deep structure, in the traditional view, is a
system of two propositions, neither of which is asserted, but which interrelate
in such a way as to express the meaning of the sentence “A wise man is honest.”
We might represent the deep structure in this sample case by formula 1, and the
surface structure by formula 2, where paired brackets are labeled to show the
category of phrase that they bound. (Many details are omitted.)
1

2

26

Language and Mind

An alternative and equivalent notation, widely used, expresses the labeled
bracketing of 1 and 2 in tree form, as 1 and 2 respectively:
1

2

If we understand the relation “subject-of” to hold between a phrase of the
category noun phrase (NP) and the sentence (S) that directly dominates it,
and the relation “predicate-of” to hold between a phrase of the category verb
phrase (VP) and the sentence that directly dominates it, then structures 1 and 2
(equivalently, 1 and 2 ) specify the grammatical functions of subject and predicate in the intended way. The grammatical functions of the deep structure (1)
play a central role in determining the meaning of the sentence. The phrase structure indicated in 2, on the other hand, is closely related to its phonetic shape –
specifically, it determines the intonation contour of the utterance represented.
Knowledge of a language involves the ability to assign deep and surface
structures to an infinite range of sentences, to relate these structures appropriately, and to assign a semantic interpretation and a phonetic interpretation to
the paired deep and surface structures. This outline of the nature of grammar
seems to be quite accurate as a first approximation to the characterization of
“knowledge of a language.”
How are the deep and surface structures related? Clearly, in the simple example given, we can form the surface structure from the deep structure by performing such operations as the following:
3

a.
b.
c.
d.

assign the marker wh- to the most deeply embedded NP, “man”
replace the NP so marked by “who”
delete “who is”
invert “man” and “wise.”

Applying just operations a and b, we derive the structure underlying the sentence “a man who is wise is honest,” which is one possible realization of the

Linguistic contributions: present

27

underlying structure (1). If, furthermore, we apply the operation c (deriving “a
man wise is honest”), we must, in English, also apply the subsidiary operation d,
deriving the surface structure (2), which can then be phonetically interpreted.
If this approach is correct in general, then a person who knows a specific
language has control of a grammar that generates (that is, characterizes) the
infinite set of potential deep structures, maps them onto associated surface structures, and determines the semantic and phonetic interpretations of these abstract
objects.6 From the information now available, it seems accurate to propose that
the surface structure determines the phonetic interpretation completely and that
the deep structure expresses those grammatical functions that play a role in
determining the semantic interpretation, although certain aspects of the surface
structure may also participate in determining the meaning of the sentence in
ways that I will not discuss here. A grammar of this sort will therefore define
a certain infinite correlation of sound and meaning. It constitutes a first step
toward explaining how a person can understand an arbitrary sentence of his
language.
Even this artificially simple example serves to illustrate some properties of
grammars that appear to be general. An infinite class of deep structures much
like 1 can be generated by very simple rules that express a few rudimentary
grammatical functions, if we assign to these rules a recursive property – in particular, one that allows them to embed structures of the form [s . . .]s within other
structures. Grammatical transformations will then iterate to form, ultimately, a
surface structure that may be quite remote from the underlying deep structure.
The deep structure may be highly abstract; it may have no close point-by-point
correlation to the phonetic realization. Knowledge of a language – “linguistic
competence,” in the technical sense of this term discussed briefly in the first
lecture – involves a mastery of these grammatical processes.
With just this much of a framework, we can begin to formulate some of the
problems that call for analysis and explanation. One major problem is posed by
the fact that the surface structure generally gives very little indication in itself
of the meaning of the sentence. There are, for example, numerous sentences
6

For a detailed development of this point of view, see J. Katz and P. Postal, An Integrated Theory
of Linguistic Descriptions (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1964) and my Aspects of the Theory
of Syntax (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1965). See also Peter S. Rosenbaum, The Grammar of
English Predicate Complement Constructions (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1967). These
contain references to earlier work that they extend and modify. There has been a great deal
of work in the past few years extending and modifying this general approach still further and
exploring alternatives. At present the field is in considerable ferment, and it will probably be
some time before the dust begins to settle and a number of outstanding issues are even tentatively
resolved. Current work is too extensive for detailed reference to be called for in a sketch such
as this. Some idea of its scope and general directions can be obtained from collections such as
R. Jacobs and P. S. Rosenbaum, eds., Readings in English Transformational Grammar (Waltham,
Mass.: Ginn and Company, 1970).

28

Language and Mind

that are ambiguous in some way that is not indicated by the surface structure.
Consider sentence 4:
4

I disapprove of John’s drinking.

This sentence can refer either to the fact of John’s drinking or to its character.
The ambiguity is resolved, in different ways, in sentences 5 and 6:
5

I disapprove of John’s drinking the beer.

6

I disapprove of John’s excessive drinking.

It is clear that grammatical processes are involved. Notice that we cannot simultaneously extend 4 in both of the ways illustrated in 5 and 6; that would give
us 7:
7

*I disapprove of John’s excessive drinking the beer.7

Our internalized grammar assigns two different abstract structures to 4, one
of which is related to the structure that underlies 5, the other to the structure
that underlies 6. Bu it is at the level of deep structure that the distinction is
represented; it is obliterated by the transformations that map the deep structures
onto the surface form associated with 4.
The processes that are involved in examples 4, 5, and 6 are quite common
in English. Thus, the sentence “I disapprove of John’s cooking” may imply
either that I think his wife should cook or that I think he uses too much garlic,
for example. Again, the ambiguity is resolved if we extend the sentence in the
manner indicated in 5 and 6.
The fact that 7 is deviant requires explanation. The explanation in this case
would be provided, at the level of particular grammar, by formulation of the
grammatical rules that assign alternative deep structures and that in each case
permit one but not the other of the extensions to 5 or 6. We would then explain
the deviance of 7 and the ambiguity of 4 by attributing this system of rules to
the person who knows the language, as one aspect of his knowledge. We might,
of course, try to move to a deeper level of explanation, asking how it is that
the person has internalized these rules instead of others that would determine a
different sound–meaning correlation and a different class of generated surface
structures (including, perhaps, 7). This is a problem of universal grammar, in
the sense described earlier. Using the terminology of note 5, the discussion at
the level of particular grammar would be one of descriptive adequacy, and at the
level of universal grammar it would be one of explanatory adequacy.
Notice that the internalized rules of English grammar have still further consequences in a case like the one just discussed. There are transformations of great
generality that permit or require the deletion of repeated elements, in whole
7

I use the asterisk in the conventional way, to indicate a sentence that deviates in some respect
from grammatical rule.

Linguistic contributions: present

29

or in part, under well-defined conditions. Applied to structure 8, these rules
derive 9.8
8
9

I don’t like John’s cooking any more than Bill’s cooking.
I don’t like John’s cooking any more than Bill’s.

Sentence 9 is ambiguous. It can mean either that I don’t like the fact that John
cooks any more than I like the fact that Bill cooks, or that I don’t like the
quality of John’s cooking any more than I like the quality of Bill’s cooking.9
However, it cannot mean that I don’t like the quality of John’s cooking any
more than I like the fact that Bill cooks, or conversely, with “fact” and “quality”
interchanged. That is, in the underlying structure (8) we must understand the
ambiguous phrases “John’s cooking” and “Bill’s cooking” in the same way if
we are to be able to delete “cooking.” It seems reasonable to assume that what
is involved is some general condition on the applicability of deletion operations
such as the one that gives 9 from 8, a rather abstract condition that takes into
account not only the structure to which the operation applies but also the history
of derivation of this structure.
Other examples can be found where a similar principle seems to be at work.
Thus, consider sentence 10, which is presumably derived from either 11 or 12
and is therefore ambiguous:10
10
11

I know a taller man than Bill.
I know a taller man than Bill does.

12

I know a taller man than Bill is.

8

9

10

Henceforth I shall generally delete brackets in giving a deep, surface, or intermediate structure,
where this will not lead to confusion. One should think of 8 and 9 as each having a full labeled
bracketing associated with it. Notice that 8 is not, of course, a deep structure, but rather the
result of applying transformations to a more primitive abstract object.
There may also be other interpretations, based on other ambiguities in the structure “John’s
cooking” – specifically, the cannibalistic interpretation and the interpretation of “cooking” as
“that which is cooked.”
I should emphasize that when I speak of a sentence as derived by transformation from another
sentence, I am speaking loosely and inaccurately. What I should say is that the structure associated with the first sentence is derived from the structure underlying the second. Thus, in the
case now being discussed, it is the surface structure of 10 that is derived, on one analysis,
from the abstract structure which, were it to undergo a different transformational development,
would be converted into the surface structure of 11. That sentences are not derived from other
sentences but rather from the structures underlying them has been explicitly assumed since
the earliest work in transformational generative grammar about fifteen years ago, but informal
statements such as those in the text here have misled many readers and have led to a good
deal of confusion in the literature. Adding to the confusion, perhaps, is the fact that a very different theory of transformational relations developed by Zellig Harris, Henry Hiz, and others,
does in fact regard the transformational operations as applied to sentences. See, for example,
Z. S. Harris, “Co-occurrence and Transformation in Linguistic Structure,” in Language, Vol. 33,
No. 3, 1957, pp. 283-340, and many later publications. For me, and most other speakers, sentence 12 is deviant. Nevertheless, the association structure that underlies 10 under one analysis
must be postulated, perhaps deriving from the structure associated with “I know a man who is
taller than Bill is.”

30

Language and Mind

It seems clear that the ambiguity of 10 is not represented in the surface structure;
the deletion of “does” in 11 leaves exactly the same structure as the deletion of
“is” in 12. But now consider sentence 13.
13

I know a taller man than Bill, and so does John.

This sentence, like 9, is two-ways ambiguous rather than four-ways ambiguous.
It can have the meaning of either 14 or 15, but not 16 or 17:11
14
15
16
17

I know a taller man than Bill does and John knows a taller man than
Bill does.
I know a taller man than Bill is and John knows a taller man than Bill
is.
I know a taller man than Bill is and John knows a taller man than Bill
does.
I know a taller man than Bill does and John knows a taller man than
Bill is.

But now a problem arises, as we can see by considering more carefully the
derivation of 13. Let us refer to the deletion operation that gives 10 from 11 as
T1 , and to the deletion operation that gives 10 from 12 as T2 . If we apply T1 to
each of the conjuncts of 14, we derive 18:
18

I know a taller man than Bill and John knows a taller man than Bill.

Application of T2 to each of the conjuncts of 15 will also yield 18. But application of T1 to one conjunct and T2 to the other conjunct in 16 will also give
18, as will the same procedure (in the opposite order) when applied to the two
conjuncts of 17. Thus, 18 can be derived by application of T1 and T2 to any of
the four underlying forms, 14, 15, 16, or 17. The structure of 18 itself does not
indicate which of these is the underlying form; the distinction has been eliminated by the deletion operations T1 and T2 . But now consider the operation
T3 , which derives “I saw Bill and so did John” from “I saw Bill and John saw
Bill.” Applying T3 to 18, we derive 13. However, we have noted that 13 can
11

It also cannot have the meaning “I know a taller man than Bill and John likes ice cream.”
Hence, if deep structure determines meaning (insofar as grammatical relations are involved),
it must be that something like 14 or 15 is the immediately underlying structure for 13. It is a
general property of deletion operations that some sort of recoverability is involved, a nontrivial
matter with interesting empirical consequences. For some discussion, see my Current Issues,
Section 2.2, and Aspects, Section 4.2.2. The problem posed by such examples as 9 and 13 was
pointed out to me by John Ross. The first reference to the possibility that history of derivation
may play a role in determining applicability of transformations appears in R. B. Lees, The
Grammar of English Nominalizations (New York: Humanities, 1960), p. 76, in connection with
his discussion – also the first – of the problem of identity of constituent structure as a factor in
determining applicability of transformations.

Linguistic contributions: present

31

have the interpretation of 14 or 15, but not of 16 or 17. Thus we can see that
T3 can apply to 18 only if either 14 or 15, but not 16 or 17, was the structure
underlying 18 in the given derivations of 18. However, this information is not
represented in 18 itself, as we have just observed. Therefore, to apply T3 to
18 we must know something about the history of derivation of 18 – we must
have information that would not be contained in the labeled bracketing of 18
itself. What we must know, in fact, is that the two conjuncts of 18 derive from
underlying structures in which the same element was deleted.12 It appears, once
again, that some general condition on applicability of deletion transformations
must be involved, a principle that somehow brings into consideration the history
of derivation of deleted strings, perhaps certain properties of the deep structure
from which they ultimately derive.
To see how complex the problem is, consider such sentences as “John’s intelligence, which is his most remarkable quality, exceeds his prudence” or “The
book, which weighs five pounds, was written by John.” Presumably, the relative
pronoun in the embedded appositive clause replaces a deleted noun phrase, and
the condition on deletion that we are discussing implies that this noun phrase
should be identical to the antecedent noun phrase “John’s intelligence” or “the
book” in the underlying structure of the appositive clause. In each case, however, it can be argued that there is a difference between the antecedent and the
noun phrase of the appositive clause. Thus, in the first case, we are referring
to the degree of John’s intelligence in the main clause but to the quality of his
intelligence in the embedded clause; and in the second case we are referring to
the book as an abstract object in the main clause but as a concrete physical object
in the embedded clause; one might expect these differences to be represented in
deep structure, thus contradicting the principle to which we seem to be driven
by the earlier examples. I will not go on with this discussion here, but the reader
will discover, if he pursues the matter, that the problem is compounded when a
richer class of cases is considered.
In fact, the correct principle is unknown in such cases as these, although some
of the conditions it must meet are clear. The problem posed by these examples
is a quite typical one. Attention to linguistic fact reveals certain properties of
sentences, relating to their sound, their meaning, their deviance, and so on.
Evidently no explanation for these facts will be forthcoming so long as we
restrict ourselves to vague talk about “habits” and “skills” and “dispositions
to respond,” or about the formation of sentences “by analogy.” We do not
have the “habit” of understanding sentences 4, 9, and 13 in a certain way: it
is unlikely that the reader has ever encountered sentences closely resembling
these, but he understands them in a highly specific way nevertheless. To refer to
12

If 18 itself is only two-ways ambiguous, a problem in fact arises at an even earlier point. The
unnaturalness of 18 makes it difficult to determine this with any confidence.

32

Language and Mind

the processes involved as “analogy” is simply to give a name to what remains
a mystery. To explain such phenomena we must discover the rules that relate
sound and meaning in the language in question – the grammar that has been
internalized by the person who knows the language – and the general principles
that determine the organization and function of these rules.
The misleading and inadequate character of surface structure becomes evident as soon as even the most simple patterns are studied. Consider, for example,
sentence 19 – again, an artificially simple example:
19

John was persuaded to leave.

The deep structure underlying this sentence must indicate that the subject–
predicate relation holds in an underlying proposition of the form of 20 (assuming
grammatical functions to be represented in the same manner suggested earlier),
and that the verb–object relation holds in an underlying proposition of the form
of 21:
  John   leave  
20
S NP
NP VP
VP S
  . . .   persuade  John   
21
S NP
NP VP
NP
NP VP S
Thus, “John” is understood to be the subject of “leave” and the object of “persuade” in 19, and these facts are properly expressed in the deep structure underlying 19 if this deep structure embodies the propositions informally represented
as 20 and 21. Although the deep structure must be constituted of such propositions, if the approach loosely outlined earlier is correct, there is no trace of
them in the surface structure of the utterance. The various transformations that
produce 19 have thoroughly obliterated the system of grammatical relations
and functions that determine the meaning of the sentence.
The point becomes still more obvious if we take note of the variety of sentences that seem superficially to resemble 19, but that differ widely in the ways
they are understood and the formal operations that apply to them. Suppose that
“persuaded” in 19 is replaced by one of the following words:13
22

expected, hired, tired, pleased, happy, lucky, eager, certain, easy

With “expected” replacing “persuaded,” the sentence can mean roughly that
the fact of John’s leaving was expected; but it is impossible to speak of the fact
of John’s leaving being persuaded. With “hired,” the sentence has an entirely
different meaning, roughly that the purpose of hiring John was so that he would
leave – an interpretation that becomes more natural if we replace “leave” by a
phrase like “fix the roof.” When “tired” is substituted, we derive a nonsentence;
13

See R. B. Lees, “A Multiply Ambiguous Adjectival Construction in English,” in Language,
Vol. 36, No. 2, 1960, pp. 207-21, for a discussion of such structures.

Linguistic contributions: present

33

it becomes a sentence if “too tired” replaces “persuaded,” the sentence now
implying that John didn’t leave. The word “pleased” is still different. In this
case we can have “too pleased,” implying that John didn’t leave, but we can
also extend the sentence to “John was too pleased to leave to suit me,” which
is impossible in the earlier cases. “Happy” is rather like “pleased,” though one
might argue that the verb–object relation holds between “please” and “John.”
The sentence “John was lucky to leave” is interpreted in still another way. It
means, roughly, that John was lucky in that he left, an interpretation that is
impossible in the earlier cases; furthermore, we can construct such sentences as
“John was a lucky fellow to leave (so early),” but none of the earlier examples
can replace “lucky” in such sentences. “John was eager to leave” differs from
the earlier cases in that it is formally associated with such expressions as “John
was eager for Bill to leave” and “John’s eagerness (for Bill) to leave.” “John
was certain to leave” can be paraphrased as “it was certain that John would
leave”; of the other examples, only “expected” is subject to this interpretation,
but “expected” obviously differs from “certain” in numerous other respects –
for example, it appears in a sentence such as “They expected John to leave.”
The word “easy” is of course entirely different; in this and only this case the
verb–object relation holds between “leave” and “John.”
It is clear, in short, that the surface structure is often misleading and uninformative and that our knowledge of language involves properties of a much more
abstract nature, not indicated directly in the surface structure. Furthermore,
even such artificially simple examples as these show how hopeless it would be
to try to account for linguistic competence in terms of “habits,” “dispositions,”
“knowing how,” and other concepts associated with the study of behavior, as
this study has been circumscribed, quite without warrant, in recent years.
Even at the level of sound structure, there is evidence that abstract representations are formed and manipulated in the mental operations involved in
language use. We have a more detailed understanding of the nature of linguistic
representation and the intricate conditions on rule application in this domain
than in any other. The work of the past few years on sound structure seems
to me to provide substantial evidence in support of the view that the form of
particular grammars is determined, in highly significant ways, by a restrictive
schematism that specifies the choice of relevant phonetic properties, the kinds
of rules that can relate surface structure to phonetic representation, and the conditions on organization and application of these rules. It thus relates closely to
the general topics discussed in the first lecture, topics that I will take up again
below in considering the question of how this restrictive, universal schematism
comes to be used in language acquisition. Furthermore, these investigations of
sound structure, insofar as they support the conclusion that abstract phonological structures are manipulated by tightly organized and intricate systems of
rules, are relevant to the very interesting problem of developing empirically

34

Language and Mind

adequate models of performance. They suggest that all current approaches to
problems of perception and organization of behavior suffer from a failure to
attribute sufficient depth and complexity to the mental processes that must be
represented in any model that attempts to come to grips with the empirical phenomena. Space does not permit a detailed development of these topics, either
with respect to the matter of phonological structure or with respect to its potential significance for cognitive psychology.14 However, one simple illustrative
example, which is quite typical, may give some idea of the nature of the evidence
that is available and the conclusions to which it points.
Recall that the syntactic rules of the language generate an infinite set of
surface structures, each of which is a labeled bracketing of a string of minimal
elements, such as 2, in which we may take the minimal elements to be the
items a, wise, man, is, honest. Each of these items can itself be represented as a
string of segments, for example man as the string of segments /m/, /æ/, /n/. Each
of these segments may be regarded in turn as a set of specified features; thus,
/m/ stands for the feature complex [+ consonantal], [– vocalic], [+ nasal], and
so on. The segmental constitution of an item will be given by a lexical entry –
a characterization of the inherent phonetic, semantic, and syntactic properties
of the items in question. The lexicon of the language is the set of such lexical
entries, with, perhaps, additional structure that need not concern us here. We
are concerned now only with the phonetic properties of the lexical entry.
The lexical entry of an item must specify just those properties that are idiosyncratic, that are not determined by linguistic rule. For example, the lexical entry
for man must indicate that its second segment is a low front vowel, but the degree
of tenseness, diphthongization, nasalization, and so on, of this vowel need not
be indicated in the lexical entry, since these are a matter of general rule, in part
particular to various English dialects, in part common to all English dialects, in
part a matter of universal phonology. Similarly, the lexical entry for man must
indicate that it has an irregular plural, with the vowel shifting from low to mid.
The segments of the lexical entry are abstract in the sense that the phonological
rules of the language will frequently modify and elaborate them in a variety
of ways; hence there need not be, in general, a simple point-by-point correspondence between the lexical entry and the actual phonetic representation. In
discussing examples, I will use phonetic symbols in the usual way, each being
regarded as a complex of a certain set of features. I will use the symbol / / to
14

For discussion of these topics, see my article “Some General Properties of Phonological Rules,”
in Language, Vol. 47, No. 1, 1967. For a much fuller and more detailed discussion of phonological theory and its application to English, with examples drawn from many languages and some
discussion of the history of the English sound system as well, see N. Chomsky and M. Halle,
The Sound Pattern of English (New York: Harper & Row, 1968). The example in the text is
discussed in detail, in the context of a more general framework of rules and principles, in
Chapter 4, Section 4, of The Sound Pattern of English. See P. Postal, Aspects of Phonological
Theory (New York: Harper & Row, 1968), for a general development of many related topics,
along with a critical analysis of alternative approaches to the study of sound structure.

Linguistic contributions: present

35

enclose lexical representations, and the symbol [ ] to enclose all representations
derived from lexical representations by application of phonological rules,
including, in particular, the final phonetic representation derived by application of the full set of phonological rules.
Consider first such words as sign-signify, paradigm-paradigmatic, and so
on. For reasons that will become clearer as we proceed, it is the derived form,
in this case, that is most closely related to the underlying abstract lexical representation. Suppose, then, that we tentatively assign to the stem in these forms
the lexical representation /sign/ and /pærædigm/ where the symbols have their
conventional phonetic interpretation. Thus, the underlying element /sign/ is
realized as phonetic [sign] before -ify. However, it is realized as phonetic [sayn]
in isolation. A similar observation holds of paradigm.
The forms of sign and paradigm in isolation are determined by certain phonological rules that, operating jointly, have the effect of converting the representation /ig/ to [ay] when followed by a word-final nasal. A careful analysis of
English phonology shows that this process can be broken into a sequence of
steps, including the following (the second and third of which, in fact, require
further analysis).
23

a. velar becomes continuant before word-final nasal
b. vowel + velar continuant becomes tense vowel
c. /ī/ becomes [ay] (where /ī/ is the tense segment corresponding
to [i])

Applying these rules to underlying /sign/ in isolation, we derive first [sin]
(where [ ] is the velar continuant) by 23a; then [sīn] by 23b; and finally [sayn]
by 24c.
Rules 23a and 23b are of little interest, but 23c is a part of a very general
system of rules of “vowel shift” that is quite central to English phonology.
There are, for example, strong reasons for supposing that the stem underlying
the forms divine-divinity is /divīn/, where the segment /ī/ is weakened to [i]
before -ity and becomes [ay] by rule 23c in isolation. Similarly, reptile derives
from underlying /reptīl/, which becomes [reptayl] by 23c in isolation and [reptil]
before -ian, with the same shortening of vowel that takes place in divinity; and
so on, in many other cases.
Consider next such words as ignite-ignition, expedite-expeditious, and
contrite-contrition. Just as reptile and divine derive, by vowel shift, from /reptīl/
and /divīn/, so we can derive the first member of each of these pairs from /ignīt/,
/expedīt/, and /contrīt/, respectively. The rule that applies to give the phonetic
realization is 23c, a special case of the general process of vowel shift. Evidently,
the second member of each pair is derived by such processes as 24 and 25:
24

Vowels become nontense before -ion, -ious, -ian, -ity, and so on.

25

The segment /t/ followed by a high front vowel is realized as [š].

36

Language and Mind

The first of these rules is the one that gives [divin] from /divīn/ in divinity
and [reptil] from /reptīl/ in reptilian. Similarly, it gives [ignit] from /ignīt/ in
ignition, [expedit] from /expedīt/ in expeditious, and [contrit] from /contīt/ in
contrition. There is an obvious underlying generalization, namely that a vowel
becomes nontense before an unstressed vowel that is not in a word-final syllable;
when properly formulated, this rule, along with vowel shift and a few others,
constitutes the central portion of the English phonological system.
The second rule, 25, applies to the element /ti/ in /ignition/, /expeditious/,
and /contrition/, replacing it by [š] and giving, finally, the phonetic realizations
[ignišə n], [ekspə dišə s], [kə ntrišə n], after the application of the rule that reduces
unstressed vowels to [ə ]. In short, the segments realized as [ayt] in ignite,
expedite, and contrite are realized as [iš] in ignition, expeditious, and contrition.
But now consider the words right-righteous, phonetically [rayt]-[rayčə s]. The
latter form appears to deviate from the regular pattern in two respects, namely in
vowel quality (we would expect [i] rather than [ay], by rule 24), and in the final
consonant of the stem (we would expect [š] rather than [č], by rule 25). If right
were subject to the same processes as expedite, we would have [rišə s] rather
than [rayčə s] as the phonetic realization, analogous to [ekspə dišə s]. What is
the explanation for this double deviation?
Notice first that rule 25 is not quite exact; there are, in fact, other cases in
which /ti/ is realized as [č] rather than as [š], for example question [kwesčə n],
contrasted with direction [də rekšə n]. A more accurate formulation of 25 would
be 26:
26

/t/ followed by a high front vowel is realized as [č] after a continuant
and as [š] elsewhere.

Returning to the form right, we see that the final consonant would be correctly
determined as [č] rather than [š] if in the underlying representation there were
a continuant preceding it – that is, if the underlying representation were /rit/,
where  is some continuant. The continuant  must, furthermore, be distinct
from any of the continuants that actually appear phonetically in this position,
namely the dental, labial, or palatal continuants in the unitalicized portion of
wrist, rift, or wished. We may assume, then, that  is the velar continuant /x/,
which does not, of course, appear phonetically in English. The underlying form,
then, would be /rixt/.
Consider now the derivation of right. By rule 23b, the representation /rixt/
becomes [rīt]. By rule 23c, the representation / rīt / becomes [rayt], which is
the phonetic realization of right.
Consider next the derivation of righteous. Assuming that it has the same
affix as expeditious and repetitious, we can represent it lexically as /rixtious/
(I do not concern myself here with the proper representation for -ous). Let us

Linguistic contributions: present

37

suppose that the ordering of the rules so far discussed is the following: 23a, 24,
26, 23b, 23c, an ordering consistent with other relevant facts of English, given
certain simplifications for convenience of exposition. Rule 23a is inapplicable
and rule 24 is vacuous, when applied to the underlying form /rixtious/. Turning
to rule 26, we see that it gives the form [rixčous]. Rule 23b now applies, giving
[rīčous], and rule 23c gives [rayčous], which becomes [rayčə s] by reduction of
unstressed vowels. Thus by rules 26 and 23, which are independently motivated,
the underlying representation /rixt/ will be realized phonetically as [rayt] in
isolation and as [rayč] in righteous, exactly as required.
These facts strongly suggest that the underlying phonological representation
must be /rixt/ (in accord with the orthography and, of course, the history).
A sequence of rules that must be in the grammar for other reasons gives the
alternation right-righteous. Therefore, this alternation is not at all exceptional,
but rather perfectly regular. Of course, the underlying representation is quite
abstract; it is connected with the superficial phonetic shape of the signal only
by a sequence of interpretive rules.
Putting the matter differently, suppose that a person knows English but does
not happen to have the vocabulary item righteous. Hearing this form for the first
time, he must assimilate it to the system he has learned. If he were presented
with the derived form [rišə s], he would, of course, take the underlying representation to be exactly like that of expedite, contrite, and so on. But hearing
[rayčə s], he knows that this representation is impossible; although the consonantal distinction [š]-[č] might easily be missed under ordinary conditions of
language use, the vocalic distinction [i]-[ay] would surely be obvious. Knowing the rules of English and hearing the vocalic element [ay] instead of [i], he
knows that either the form is a unique exception or it contains a sequence /i/
followed by velar and is subject to rule 26. The velar must be a continuant,15
that is, /x/. But given that the velar is a continuant, it follows, if the form is
regular (the null hypothesis, always), that the consonant must be [č], not [š],
by rule 26. Thus, the hearer should perceive [rayčə s] rather than [rayšə s], even
if the information as to the medial consonant is lacking in the received signal.
Furthermore, the pressure to preserve regularity of alternations should act to
block the superficial analogy to expedite-expeditious and ignite-ignition, and to
preserve [č] as the phonetic realization of underlying /t/, as long as [ay] appears
in place of expected [i], exactly as we observe to have occurred.
I do not mean this as a literal step-by-step account of how the form is learned,
of course, but rather as a possible explanation of why the form resists a superficial (and in fact incorrect) analogy and preserves its status. We can explain the
15

If it were a noncontinuant, it would have to be unvoiced, that is, /k/, since there are no voiced–
voiceless consonant clusters in final position, by general rule. But it cannot be /k/, since /k/
remains in this position (for example, “direct,” “evict,” and so on).

38

Language and Mind

perception and preservation in the grammar of the [č]-[š] contrast in righteousexpeditious on the basis of the perceived distinction between [ay] and [i] and the
knowledge of a certain system of rules. The explanation rests on the assumption that the underlying representations are quite abstract, and the evidence
cited suggests that this assumption is, in fact, correct.
A single example can hardly carry much conviction. A careful investigation
of sound structure, however, shows that there are a number of examples of this
sort, and that, in general, highly abstract underlying structures are related to
phonetic representations by a long sequence of rules, just as on the syntactic
level abstract deep structures are in general related to surface structures by
a long sequence of grammatical transformations. Assuming the existence of
abstract mental representations and interpretive operations of this sort, we can
find a surprising degree of organization underlying what appears superficially
to be a chaotic arrangement of data, and in certain cases we can also explain
why linguistic expressions are heard, used, and understood in certain ways. One
cannot hope to determine either the underlying abstract forms or the processes
that relate them to signals by introspection; there is, furthermore, no reason
why one should find this consequence in any way surprising.
The explanation sketched above is at the level of particular rather than universal grammar, as this distinction was formulated earlier. That is, we have
accounted for a certain phenomenon on the basis of the assumption that certain rules appear in the internalized grammar, noting that these rules are, for
the most part, independently motivated. Of course, considerations of universal
grammar enter into this explanation insofar as they affect the choice of grammar on the basis of data. This interpenetration is unavoidable, as noted earlier.
There are cases, however, where explicit principles of universal grammar enter
more directly and clearly into a pattern of explanation. Thus, investigation of
sound systems reveals certain very general principles of organization, some
quite remarkable, governing phonological rules (see references in note 14).
For example, it has been observed that certain phonological rules operate in a
cycle, in a manner determined by the surface structure. Recall that the surface
structure can be represented as a labeled bracketing of the utterance, such as 2.
In English, the very intricate phonological rules that determine stress contours
and vowel reduction apply to phrases bounded by paired brackets, in the surface structure, applying first to a minimal phrase of this sort, then to the next
larger phrase, and so on, until the maximal domain of phonological processes
is reached (in simple cases, the sentence itself). Thus, in the case of 2 the rules
apply to the individual words (which, in a full description, would be assigned
to categories and therefore bracketed), then to the phrases a wise man and is
honest, and finally to the whole sentence. A few simple rules will give quite
varied results, as the surface structures that determine their cyclic application
vary.

Linguistic contributions: present

39

Some simple effects of the principle of cyclic application are illustrated by
such forms as those of 27:
27

a. relaxation, emendation, elasticity, connectivity
b. illustration, demonstration, devastation, anecdotal

The unitalicized vowels are reduced to [ə ] in 27b, but they retain their original quality in 27a. In some cases, we can determine the original quality of
the reduced vowels of 27b from other derived forms (for example, illustrative,
demonstrative). The examples of 27a differ from those of 27b morphologically
in that the former are derived from underlying forms (namely, relax, emend,
elastic, connective) that contain primary stress on the unitalicized vowel when
these underlying forms appear in isolation; those of 27b do not have this property. It is not difficult to show that vowel reduction in English, the replacement
of a vowel by [ə ], is contingent upon lack of stress. We can therefore account
for the distinction between 27a and 27b by assuming the cyclic principle just
formulated. In the case of 27a, on the first, innermost cycle, stress will be
assigned by general rules to the unitalicized vowels. On the next cycle, stress is
shifted,16 but the abstract stress assigned on the first cycle is sufficient to protect
the vowel from reduction. In the examples of 27b, earlier cycles never assign an
abstract stress to the unitalicized vowel, which thus reduces. Observe that it is
an abstract stress that protects the vowel from reduction. The actual, phonetic
stress on the unitalicized nonreduced vowels is very weak; it would be stress 4,
in the usual convention. In general, vowels with this weak a phonetic stress
reduce, but in this case the abstract stress assigned in the earlier cycle prevents
reduction. Thus, it is the abstract underlying representation that determines the
phonetic form, a primary role being played by the abstract stress that is virtually
eliminated in the phonetic form.
In this case, we can provide an explanation for a certain aspect of perception
and articulation in terms of a very general abstract principle, namely the principle of cyclic application of rules (see page 38). It is difficult to imagine how the
language learner might derive this principle by “induction” from the data presented to him. In fact, many of the effects of this principle relate to perception
and have little or no analogue in the physical signal itself, under normal conditions of language use, so that the phenomena on which the induction would have
been based cannot be part of the experience of one who is not already making
use of the principle. In fact, there is no procedure of induction or association that
offers any hope of leading from such data as is available to a principle of this
sort (unless, begging the question, we introduce the principle of cyclic application into the “inductive procedure” in some manner). Therefore, the conclusion
16

In “connectivity,” it is on the third cycle that the stress is shifted. The second cycle merely
reassigns stress to the same syllable that is stressed on the first cycle.

40

Language and Mind

seems warranted that the principle of cyclic application of phonological rules is
an innate organizing principle of universal grammar that is used in determining
the character of linguistic experience and in constructing a grammar that constitutes the acquired knowledge of language. At the same time, this principle
of universal grammar offers an explanation for such phenomena as were noted
in 27.
There is some evidence that a similar principle of cyclic application applies
also on the syntactic level. John Ross has presented an ingenious analysis of
some aspects of English pronominalization illustrating this.17 Let us assume
that pronominalization involves a process of “deletion” analogous to those processes discussed earlier in connection with examples 8– 18. This process, to
first approximation, replaces one of two identical noun phrases by an appropriate pronoun. Thus, the underlying structure 28 will be converted into 29, by
pronominalization.
28

John learned that John had won.

29

John learned that he had won.

Abstracting away from properties of 28 that are not essential to this discussion,
we can present it in the form 30, where x and y are the identical noun phrases and
y is the one pronominalized, and where the brackets bound sentential expressions.


30
. . . x . . . [. . . y . . .]
Notice that we cannot form 31 from 28 by pronominalization:18
31

He learned that John had won.

That is, we cannot have pronominalization in the case that would be represented
as 32, using the conventions of 30:


32
. . . y . . . [. . . x . . .]
Consider next the sentences of 33:
33

a. That
John won the race

 surprised him.
[. . . x . . .] . . . y . . .
b. John’s
winning the race

 surprised him.
[. . . x . . .] . . . y . . .

17
18

J. Ross, “On the Cyclic Nature of English Pronominalization,” in To Honor Roman Jakobson
(New York: Humanities, 1967).
Of course, 31 is a sentence, but “he” in the sentence does not refer to John as it does in 29.
Thus, 31 is not formed by pronominalization if the two occurrences of “John” are intended to
be different in reference. We exclude this case from discussion here. For some remarks bearing
on this problem, see my Aspects, pp. 144–47.

Linguistic contributions: present

41

c. That
he won the race surprised John.

[. . . y . . .] . . . x . . .
d. His
 winning the racesurprised John.
[. . . y . . .] . . . x . . .
Continuing with the same conventions, the forms are represented underneath,
in each case. Summarizing, we see that of the possible types 30, 32, 33a, b and
33c, d, all permit pronominalization except 32. These remarks belong to the
particular grammar of English.
Notice that alongside 33d we also have sentence 34:
34

Winning the race surprised John.

Given the framework we have been assuming throughout, 34 must be derived
from the structure “John’s winning the race surprised John.” Hence, in this case
pronominalization can be a full deletion.
Consider now sentences 35 and 36:
35

Our learning that John had won the race surprised him.

36

Learning that John had won the race surprised him.

Sentence 35 can be understood with “him” referring to John, but 36 cannot.
Thus, 35 can be derived by pronominalization from 37, but 36 is not derived
from 28:




37
Our learning [that John had won the race] surprised John.

38



John’s learning [that John had won the race] surprised John.



What might be the explanation for this phenomenon? As Ross observes, it can
be explained in terms of the particular grammar of English if we assume, in
addition, that certain transformations apply in a cycle, first to innermost phrases,
then to larger phrases, and so on – that is, if we assume that these transformations apply to the deep structure by a process analogous to the process by which
phonological rules apply to the surface structure.19 Making this assumption, let
19

That transformational rules may be supposed to function in this way, itself a nontrivial fact if
true, is suggested in my Aspects, Chapter 3. Ross’s observation suggests that this principle of
application is not only possible but also necessary. Other interesting arguments to this effect
are presented in R. Jacobs and P. S. Rosenbaum, eds., Readings in English Transformational
Grammar, Chapter 28. The matter is far from settled. In general, understanding of syntactic
structure is much more limited than that of phonological structure, descriptions are much more
rudimentary, and, correspondingly, principles of universal syntax are much less firmly established than principles of universal phonology, though the latter, needless to say, must also be
regarded as tentative. In part, this may be due to the inherent complexity of the subject matter.

42

Language and Mind

us consider the underlying structure 38. On the innermost cycle, pronominalization does not apply at all, since there is no second noun phrase identical
to “John” in the most deeply embedded proposition. On the second
 cycle, we
consider the phrase “ John’s learning [that John had won the race] .” This can
be regarded as a structure of the form 30, giving 39 by pronominalization; it
cannot be regarded as of the form 32, giving 40 by pronominalization, because
the particular grammar of English does not permit pronominalization in the
case of 32, as we have noted:
39
40

John’s learning [that he had won the race]
his learning [that John had won the race]

But 40 would have to be the form underlying 36. Hence, 36 cannot be derived
by pronominalization from 38, although 35 can be derived from 37.
In this case, then, a principle of universal grammar combines with an independently established rule of particular English grammar to yield a certain rather
surprising empirical consequence, namely that 35 and 36 must differ in the
referential interpretation of the pronoun “him.” Once again, as in the formally
somewhat analogous case of vowel reduction discussed earlier in connection
with examples 27a and 27b, it is quite impossible to provide an explanation in
terms of “habits” and “dispositions” and “analogy.” Rather, it seems that certain
abstract and in part universal principles governing human mental faculties must
be postulated to explain the phenomena in question. If the principle of cyclic
application is indeed a regulative principle determining the form of knowledge of language for humans, a person who has learned the particular rules
governing pronominalization in English would know, intuitively and without
instruction or additional evidence, that 35 and 36 differ in the respect just
noted.
The most challenging theoretical problem in linguistics is that of discovering
the principles of universal grammar that interweave with the rules of particular
grammars to provide explanations for phenomena that appear arbitrary and
chaotic. Probably the most persuasive examples at this time (and also the most
important ones, in that the principles involved are highly abstract and their
operations quite intricate) are in the domain of phonology, but these are too
complex to present within the scope of this lecture.20 Another syntactic example

20

In part, it results from the fact that universal phonetics, which provides a kind of “empirical
control” for phonological theory, is much more firmly grounded than universal semantics,
which should, in principle, provide a partially analogous control for syntactic theory. In modern linguistics, phonetics (and, in part, phonology) has been studied in considerable depth and
with much success, but the same cannot be said as yet for semantics, despite much interesting
work.
See references in note 14. The issue is discussed in a general way in my “Explanatory Models in
Linguistics,” in E. Nagel, P. Suppes, and A. Tarski, eds., Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy
of Science (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1962); in my Current Issues, Section 2;
in my Aspects, Chapter 1; and in other publications referred to in these references.

Linguistic contributions: present

43

that illustrates the general problem in a fairly simple way is provided by the
rules for formation of wh-questions in English.21
Consider such sentences as the following:
41

a.
b.
c.
d.

Who expected Bill to meet Tom?
Who(m) did John expect to meet Tom?
Who(m) did John expect Bill to meet?
What (books) did you order John to ask Bill to persuade his friends
to stop reading?

As examples a, b, and c show, a noun phrase in any of the three italicized positions in a sentence such as “John expected Bill to meet Tom” can be questioned.
The process is essentially this:
42

a. wh-placement: assign the marker wh- to a noun phrase.
b. wh-inversion: place the marked noun phrase at the beginning of the
sentence.
c. auxiliary attraction: move a part of the verbal auxiliary or the
copula to the second position in the sentence.
d. phonological interpretation: replace the marked noun phrase by an
appropriate interrogative form.22

All four of these processes apply nonvacuously in the case of 41b and 41c.
Sentence 41b, for example, is formed by applying wh-placement to the noun
phrase “someone” in “John expected someone to meet Tom.” Application of
the process of wh-inversion (42b) gives “wh-someone John expected to meet
Tom.” The process of auxiliary attraction (42c) gives “wh-someone did John
expect to meet Tom.” Finally, the process of phonological interpretation (42d)
gives 41b. Sentence 41d illustrates the fact that these processes can extract a
noun phrase that is deeply embedded in a sentence – without limit, in fact.
Of the processes listed in 42, all but auxiliary attraction apply as well in the
formation of relative clauses, giving such phrases as “the man who(m) John
expected to meet Tom,” and so on.
21

22

This matter is discussed in my Current Issues. There are several versions of this monograph. The
first, presented at the International Congress of Linguistics, 1962, appears in the Proceedings of
the Congress with the title of the session at which it was presented, “Logical Basis of Linguistic
Theory,” ed. H. Lunt (New York: Humanities, 1964); a second appears in J. Fodor and J. J.
Katz, eds., Structure of Language: Readings in the Philosophy of Language (Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964); the third, as a separate monograph (New York: Humanities, 1965).
These versions differ in the treatment of the examples discussed here; none of the treatments is
satisfactory, and the general problem remains open. New and interesting ideas on this matter are
presented in J. Ross, “Constraints on Variables in Syntax,” MIT doctoral thesis (unpublished).
I follow here the general lines of the earliest of the three versions of Current Issues, which, in
retrospect, seems to me to offer the most promising approach of the three.
Actually, it seems that only indefinite singular noun phrases can be questioned (that is, “someone,” “something,” and so on), a fact that relates to the matter of recoverability of deletion
mentioned in note 11. See my Current Issues for some discussion.

44

Language and Mind

Notice, however, that there are certain restrictions on the formation of questions and relatives in this manner. Consider, for example, the sentences of 43:
43

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

For him to understand this lecture is difficult.
It is difficult for him to understand this lecture.
He read the book that interested the boy.
He believed the claim that John tricked the boy.
He believed the claim that John made about the boy.
They intercepted John’s message to the boy.

Suppose that we try applying the processes of interrogative and relative formation to the italicized noun phrases in 43. We should derive the following
interrogatives and relatives from 43a–43f, respectively:
44

aI.
aR.
bI.
bR.
cI.
cR.
dI.
dR.
eI.
eR.
fI.
fR.

*What is for him to understand difficult?
*a lecture that for him to understand is difficult
What is it difficult for him to understand?
a lecture that it is difficult for him to understand
*Who did he read the book that interested?
*the boy who he read the book that interested
*Who did he believe the claim that John tricked?
*the boy who he believed the claim that John tricked
*Who did he believe the claim that John made about?
*the boy who he believed the claim that John made about
*Who did they intercept John’s message to?
*the boy who they intercepted John’s message to

Of these, only bI and bR are fully acceptable, and cases a, c, d, and e are
quite impossible, although it would be quite clear what they meant, were they
grammatically permissible. It is not at all obvious how the speaker of English
knows this to be so. Thus, sentences 43a and 43b are synonymous, yet only
43b is subject to the processes in question. And although these processes do not
apply to 43d and 43f, they can be applied, with much more acceptable results,
to the very similar sentences 45a and 45b:
45

a. He believed that John tricked the boy. (Who did he believe that
John tricked? – the boy who he believed that John tricked)
b. They intercepted a message to the boy. (Who did they intercept a
message to? – the boy who they intercepted a message to)

In some unknown way, the speaker of English devises the principles of 42 on
the basis of data available to him; still more mysterious, however, is the fact
that he knows under what formal conditions these principles are applicable. It
can hardly be seriously maintained that every normal speaker of English has
had his behavior “shaped” in the indicated ways by appropriate reinforcement.
The sentences of 43, 44, and 45 are as “unfamiliar” as the vast majority of those

Linguistic contributions: present

45

that we encounter in daily life, yet we know intuitively, without instruction or
awareness, how they are to be treated by the system of grammatical rules that
we have mastered.
It seems, once again, that there is a general principle that accounts for many
such facts. Notice that in 43a the italicized noun phrase is contained within
another noun phrase, namely “for him to understand this lecture,” which is the
subject of the sentence. In 43b, however, a rule of extraposition has placed the
phrase “for him to understand this lecture” outside of the subject noun phrase,
and in the resulting structure this phrase is not a noun phrase at all, so that the
italicized phrase in 43b is no longer contained within a noun phrase. Suppose
we were to impose on grammatical transformations the condition that no noun
phrase can be extracted from within another noun phrase – more generally, that
if a transformation applies to a structure of the form


S . . . [A . . .] A . . . S
for any category A, then it must be so interpreted as to apply to the maximal
phrase of the type A.23 Then the processes of 42 would be blocked, as required,
in cases 43a, c, d , e, and f, but not in 43b. We will return shortly to 45.
There are other examples that support a principle of this sort, which we will
refer to as the A-over-A principle. Consider the sentences of 46:
46

a. John kept the car in the garage.
b. Mary saw the man walking toward the railroad station.

Each of these is ambiguous. Thus, 46a can mean that the car in the garage was
kept by John, or that the car was kept in the garage by John. In the first case, the
italicized phrase is part of a noun phrase, “the car in the garage”; in the latter
case it is not. Similarly, 46b can mean that the man walking toward the railroad
station was seen by Mary, or that the man was seen walking toward the railroad
station by Mary (or, irrelevantly to this discussion, that Mary, while walking
toward the railroad station, saw the man). Again, in the first case, the italicized
phrase is part of a noun phrase, “the man walking toward the railroad station”;
in the latter case, it is not. But now consider the two interrogatives of 47:
47

23

a. What (garage) did John keep the car in?
b. What did Mary see the man walking toward?
We might extend this principle to the effect that this transformation must also apply to the
minimal
phrase of the type S (sentence). Thus, thesentence

[ Bill would leave before dark]
S S
S John was convinced that S

can be transformed to “John was convinced that before dark Bill would leave” but not to “before
dark John was convinced that Bill would leave,” which must have a different source. Like the
original principle, this extension is not without its problems, but it has a certain amount of
support nevertheless.

46

Language and Mind

Each of these is unambiguous and can have only the interpretation of the
underlying sentence in which the italicized phrase is not part of another noun
phrase. The same is true of the relatives formed from 46, and these facts
too would be explained by the A-over-A principle. There are many similar
examples.
A slightly more subtle case that might, perhaps, be explained along the same
lines is provided by such sentences as 48 and 49:
48
49

John has the best proof of that theorem.
What theorem does John have the best proof of?

In its most natural interpretation, sentence 48 describes a situation in which
a number of people have proofs of that theorem, and John’s is the best.
The sense thus suggests that “best” modifies the nominal phrase “proof of
that theorem,” which contains another nominal phrase, “that theorem.”24 The
A-over-A principle would therefore imply that the phrase “that theorem” not
be subject to the processes of 42. Hence, 49 would not be derived by these processes from 48. And, in fact, sentence 49 has an interpretation rather different
from that of 48. Sentence 49 is appropriate to a situation in which John has
proofs of a number of theorems, and the questioner is asking which of these
proofs is the best. The underlying structure, whatever it may be, would associate
“best” with “proof,” not with “proof of that theorem,” so that “that theorem”
is not embedded within a phrase of the same type and is therefore subject to
questioning (and, similarly, to relativization).
The general principle just proposed has a certain explanatory force, as such
examples illustrate. If postulated as a principle of universal grammar, it can
explain why the particular rules of English operate to generate certain sentences
while rejecting others, and to assign sound–meaning relations in ways that
appear, superficially, to violate regular analogies. Putting the matter in different
terms, if we assume that the A-over-A principle is a part of the innate schematism
that determines the form of knowledge of language, we can account for certain
aspects of the knowledge of English possessed by speakers who obviously have
not been trained and who have not even been presented with data bearing on
the phenomena in question in any relevant way, so far as can be ascertained.
Further analysis of data of English reveals, not unexpectedly, that this account
is oversimplified and runs up against many difficulties. Consider, for example,
sentences 50 and 51:
24

Space does not permit a discussion of the distinction implied here in the loose terminology,
“noun phrase”–“nominal phrase,” but this is not crucial to the point at issue. See my “Remarks on
Nominalization,” in R. Jacobs and P. S. Rosenbaum, eds., Readings in English Transformational
Grammar. There are other interpretations of 49 (for example, with contrastive stress on “John”),
and there are many open problems relating to such structures as these.

Linguistic contributions: present

50
51

47

John thought (that) Bill had read the book.
John wondered why Bill had read the book.

In the case of 50, the italicized phrase is subject to interrogation and relativization, but not in the case of 51. It is unclear whether the phrases “that Bill had
read the book” and “why Bill had read the book” are noun phrases. Suppose
that they are not. Then sentence 50 is handled in accordance with the A-over-A
principle, but not 51. To explain the blocking of the processes of 42 in the case
of 51, we would have to assign the phrase “why Bill had read the book” to the
same category as “the book.” In fact, there is a natural suggestion along these
lines. Sentence 51 is typical in that the phrase from which the noun phrase is to
be extracted is itself a wh- phrase, rather than a that- phrase. Suppose that the
process of wh- placement (42a) assigns the element wh- not only to “the book”
in 51 but also to the proposition containing it. Thus, both “wh- the book” and
“why Bill had read the book” belong to the category wh-, which would now be
regarded as a syntactic feature of a sort discussed in my Aspects of the Theory of
Syntax, Chapter 2 (see note 6). Under these assumptions, the A-over-A principle
will serve to explain the difference between 50 and 51.
Suppose that the phrases in question are noun phrases. Now it is 50, not 51,
that poses the problem. Assuming that our analysis is correct so far, there must
be some rule that assigns to the proposition “that Bill had read the book” a
property of “transparency” that permits noun phrases to be extracted from it
even though it is a noun phrase. There are, in fact, other examples that suggest
the necessity for such a rule, presumably a rule of the particular grammar of
English. Thus, consider sentences 52, 53, and 54:
52
53
54

Who would you approve of my seeing?
What would you approve of John’s drinking?
*What would you approve of John’s excessive drinking of?

Sentences 52 and 53 are formed by applying the processes of interrogation
to a noun phrase contained in the larger phrases “my seeing –,” “John’s
drinking –.” Hence, these larger noun phrases are transparent to the extraction operation. However, as 54 indicates, the italicized noun phrase in 55 is not
transparent to this operation:
55

You would approve of John’s excessive drinking of the beer.

These examples are typical of many that suggest what the rule might be that
assigns transparency. Earlier we discussed sentence 56 (sentence 4), pointing
out that it is ambiguous:
56

I disapprove of John’s drinking.

48

Language and Mind

Under one interpretation, the phrase “John’s drinking” has the internal structure
of a noun phrase. Thus, the rule that inserts adjectives (3d) between a determiner
and a noun applies, giving “John’s excessive drinking”; and, in fact, other
determiners may replace “John’s” – “the,” “that,” “much of that,” and so on.
Under this interpretation, the phrase “John’s drinking” behaves exactly like
“John’s refusal to leave,” “John’s rejection of the offer,” and so on. Under the
other interpretation, “John’s drinking (the beer)” does not have the internal
structure of a noun phrase and is handled analogously to “John’s having read
the book,” “John’s refusing to leave,” “John’s rejecting the offer,” and so on,
none of which permits adjective insertion or replacement of “John’s” by other
determiners. Suppose that we postulate a rule of English grammar that assigns
transparency, in the sense just defined, to noun phrases that are also propositions
lacking the internal structure of noun phrases. Thus, the phrases “that Bill had
read the book” in 50, “my seeing –” in the structure underlying 52, and “John’s
drinking –” in the structure underlying 53 would be assigned transparency; more
precisely, the dominant noun phrase in these examples would not serve to block
extraction by the A-over-A principle. In sentence 51, extraction would still be
blocked by the category wh-, along the lines indicated earlier. And sentence 54 is
ruled out because the relevant noun phrase of the underlying structure, “John’s
excessive drinking of –,” does have the internal structure of a noun phrase, as
just noted, and therefore is not subject to the special rule of English grammar
that assigns transparency to the category NP when this category dominates a
proposition that lacks the internal structure of an NP.
There are a few other cases that suggest the need for rules of particular
grammar assigning transparency in this sense. Consider sentences 57 and 58:
57

a. They intercepted John’s message to the boy. (Sentence 43f)
b. He saw John’s picture of Bill.
c. He saw the picture of Bill.

58

a.
b.
c.
d.

They intercepted a message to the boy. (Sentence 45b)
He saw a picture of Bill.
He has a belief in justice.
He has faith in Bill’s integrity.

The italicized noun phrases in 57 are not subject to the processes of interrogation and relativization, in accordance with the A-over-A principle, as we have
already noted. In the case of 58, interrogation and relativization seem much
more natural in these positions, at least in informal spoken English. Thus, the
noun phrases containing the italicized phrases must be assigned transparency.
It seems that what is involved is indefiniteness of the dominating noun phrase;
if so, then for certain dialects there is a rule assigning transparency to a noun
phrase of the form
59

[np indefinite . . . NP]np

Linguistic contributions: present

49

There remain a number of very serious problems that seem to resist solution
by such extensions and modifications of the A-over-A principle. Notice that
this principle is formulated in a way that is not really well supported by the
examples so far given. If the A-over-A principle were true in general, we would
expect to find cases in which a phrase of category A cannot be extracted from
a larger phrase of category A, for various choices of A. In fact, the examples
given so far involve only A = noun phrase (or, perhaps, A = [+ wh-], as in the
discussion of 51). Hence, an alternative formulation of the principle consistent
with the facts just noted would assign nontransparency as an ad hoc property
of certain types of noun phrases (and perhaps other constructions), rather than
as a property of a category A dominating another category of the type A. Given
just the facts so far presented, it would be proper to postulate the A-over-A
principle instead of this alternative precisely because the A-over-A principle
has a certain naturalness, whereas the alternative is entirely ad hoc, a listing
of nontransparent structures. But there is crucial evidence, pointed out by John
Ross (see reference in note 21), suggesting that the A-over-A principle is not
correct. Ross points out that in the constructions from which noun phrases
cannot be extracted, adjectives also cannot be extracted. Thus, consider the
contexts “I believe that John saw –,” “I believe the claim that John saw –,”
and “I wonder whether John saw –.” From the first of these, but not the second
or third, we can extract a noun phrase in interrogation or relativization, a fact
that we have been attempting to account for by modifications of the A-over-A
principle. But the same is true of extraction of adjectives. Thus we can form
“handsome though I believe that John is,” but not *“handsome though I believe
the claim that John is,” *“handsome though I wonder whether John is,” etc.
Whether one can extend the approach just discussed to account for this problem
in some natural way, I do not know; at the moment, I see no approach that does
not involve a perfectly ad hoc step. Perhaps this indicates that the approach
through the A-over-A principle is incorrect, leaving us for the moment with only
a collection of constructions in which extraction is, for some reason, impossible
to accomplish.
Whatever the answer will prove to be, the complex of problems just discussed
is a typical and important illustration of the kind of topic that is at the border
of research today, in the sense mentioned at the outset of this lecture: that
is, certain problems can be formulated clearly within a framework of ideas
that is reasonably clear and well understood; certain partial solutions can be
advanced; and a range of examples can be discovered where these solutions
fail, leaving open for the time being the question whether what is needed is
further elaboration and sharpening or a radically different approach.
I have so far discussed several kinds of conditions that transformations must
meet: conditions of deletion, of the sort brought out by examples 8–18; the
principle of cyclic application, illustrated by the discussion of examples 28–40
(with the phonological analogue discussed in connection with 27); and the

50

Language and Mind

A-over-A principle that was proposed as the basis for an explanation of such
phenomena as are illustrated by examples 44–58. In each case, there is some
reason to believe that the principle is appropriate, though there is no lack of
evidence showing that the principle is inadequately formulated or, perhaps, misconceived. As a final illustration of this state of affairs, typical of the borderline
of research that exists in linguistics as in any other field, consider a problem first
discussed by Peter Rosenbaum (see reference in note 6). Consider the sentences
of 60:
60

a. John agreed to go.
b. John persuaded Bill to leave.
c. Finding Tom there caused Bill to wonder about John.

In interpreting these sentences, we supply a “missing subject” for the verbs
“go,” “leave,” and “find,” respectively. In 60a, we understand the subject of
“go” to be “John”; in 60b, we understand the subject of “leave” to be “Bill”;
in 60c, we understand the subject of “find” and the subject of “wonder” to
be “Bill.” In terms of the framework presupposed so far, it would be natural
(though perhaps not necessary, as we will see below) to regard this missing
subject as the actual subject in the deep structure, eliminated by a deletion
operation. Thus, the underlying deep structures might be something like 61:
61

a. John agreed [John go]
b. John persuaded Bill [Bill leave]
c. [Bill find Tom there] caused Bill to wonder about John

On the other hand, the facts indicate clearly that the sentences of 60 cannot
derive from, say, 62:
62

a. John agreed [someone go]
b. John persuaded Bill [John leave]
c. [John find Tom there] caused Bill to wonder about John

It would be difficult to argue that in such cases there is an intrinsic semantic
consideration ruling against such structures as 62. For example, one might interpret 62a as meaning that John agreed that someone should go; 62b as meaning
that John persuaded Bill that he (John) would (should) leave; 62c as meaning
that John’s finding Tom there caused Bill to wonder about John. There must be
some general syntactic principle that rules against 62 as possible sources for 60
and that causes us to interpret 60 as based rather on 61. Rosenbaum suggests
that what is involved is a certain condition on deletion operations, an “erasure
principle” that prescribes roughly that the subject of an embedded proposition
is deleted by the nearest noun phrase outside of this proposition, “nearness”
being measured in terms of the number of branches in a representation such as

Linguistic contributions: present

51

1 or 2 .25 As he shows, a great many examples of varied sorts can be explained
on this general assumption, which, like the others that I have been reviewing,
involves a condition on transformations that would constitute part of universal
grammar.
Here too, however, certain problems arise. Consider, for example, the following cases:26
63
64
65
66
67

68
69

a.
b.
a.
b.
a.
b.
c.

John promised Bill to leave.
John gave me the impression of working on that problem.
John gave me the suggestion of working on that problem.
John asked me what to wear.
John told me what to wear.
John asked Bill for permission to leave.
John begged Bill to permit him to stay.
John begged Bill to be permitted to stay.
John begged Bill to be shown the new book.
John made an offer to Bill (received advice from Bill, received an
invitation from Bill) to stay.
John helped Bill write the book.

Sentence 63 violates the principle, since it is John, not Bill, who is to leave. In
64a, “John” is understood to be the subject of “work,” whereas in the apparently
analogous sentence 64b the subject is understood to be “I.” In the case of
65a, it is “John” that is the understood subject of “wear”; in 65b, it is “I.”
In the case of 66, “John” is the understood subject of “leave” and “Bill” of
“permit,” underlying “permission,” presumably; in the case of 67a, “Bill” is
the understood surface subject of the embedded proposition, but in 67b and
67c it is “John,” although “Bill” is the “nearest” noun phrase in all three cases,
in Rosenbaum’s sense. In 68, it is “John” that is understood as the subject
of “stay,” in apparent contradiction to the principle, though much depends on
unresolved questions as to how these sentences are to be analyzed. The case of
69 is obscure in other ways. The erasure principle would suggest that “Bill” is
the subject of “write,” although of course the sentence does not imply that Bill
wrote the book – rather John and Bill did, together. But there is a difficulty in
pursuing this interpretation. Thus, from 69 we can conclude that John helped
25

26

In yet-unpublished work, David Perlmutter has presented a strong argument that what is involved
is not a condition on transformations but rather a condition on well-formed deep structures. The
distinction is not crucial for what follows but would become important at a less superficial level
of discussion.
Examples 63 and 67 are discussed by Rosenbaum; 64 was pointed out by Maurice Gross; 65 was
pointed out in a different connection by Zeno Vendler, “Nominalizations,” in Transformations
and Discourse Analysis Papers, No. 55 (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 1964), p. 67.

52

Language and Mind

write the book, but from the apparently analogous sentence “John helped the
cat have kittens,” we cannot deduce that “John helped have kittens,” which is
deviant, a fact that suggests that somehow there must be a grammatical relation
between “John” and “write” in 69. To put it differently, the problem is how to
account for “John helped write the book” as analogous to 60a, since obviously
the analogue to 61a won’t do as a source.
Without pursuing the matter any further, we can see that although the erasure
principle has much to recommend it and is probably somehow involved in the
correct solution to this network of problems, there is much evidence still to be
accounted for. As in the other cases mentioned, there are a variety of problems
relating to the conditions that determine applicability of transformations, problems that still resist any near-definitive solution, though some interesting and
illuminating proposals can be made that seem to go part of the way toward a
general solution.
In discussing the nature of grammatical operations, I have restricted myself
to syntactic and phonological examples, avoiding questions of semantic interpretation. If a grammar is to characterize the full linguistic competence of the
speaker–hearer, it must comprise rules of semantic interpretation as well, but
little is known of any depth regarding this aspect of grammar. In the references
cited earlier (see note 6), it is proposed that a grammar consists of a syntactic
component that specifies an infinite set of paired deep and surface structures
and expresses the transformational relationship between these paired elements,
a phonological component that assigns a phonetic representation to the surface
structure, and a semantic component that assigns a semantic representation to
the deep structure. As noted earlier (p. 27; see also pp. 94–97), I think there is
strong evidence that aspects of the surface structure are also relevant to semantic
interpretation.27 However this may be, there can be little doubt that a full grammar must contain fairly intricate rules of semantic interpretation, keyed, at least
in part, to fairly specific properties of the lexical items and formal structures of
the language in question. To mention just one example, consider sentence 70:
70

John has lived in Princeton.

From the assumption that this sentence has been properly used to make a statement, we can conclude that John is a person (one would not say that his dog
has lived in Princeton); that Princeton is a place meeting certain physical and
27

For some remarks concerning this problem, see my “Surface Structure and Semantic Interpretation,” in R. Jakobson, ed., Studies in General and Oriental Linguistics (Tokyo: TEC Corporation
for Language and Educational Research, 1970). Literature on semantic interpretation of syntactic structures is expanding fairly rapidly. For recent discussion, see J. J. Katz, The Philosophy of
Language (New York: Harper & Row, 1966); U. Weinreich, “Explorations in Semantic Theory,”
in T. A. Sebeok, ed., Current Trends in Linguistics, Vol. III (New York: Humanities, 1966);
J. J. Katz, “Recent Issues in Semantic Theory,” in Foundations of Language, Vol. 3, No. 2, May
1967, pp. 124–94; and many other papers.

Linguistic contributions: present

53

sociological conditions (given that “Princeton” is a proper noun); that John is
now alive (I can say that I have lived in Princeton, but I cannot now say “Einstein
has lived in Princeton” – rather, “Einstein lived in Princeton”); and so on. The
semantic interpretation of 70 must be such as to account for these facts.
In part, such questions as these might be subsumed under a still-to-bedeveloped universal semantics, in which concepts and their relations are analyzed in a very general way; to take a classical example, it might be argued that
the relation of meaning between “John is proud of what Bill did” and “John has
some responsibility for Bill’s actions” should be explained in terms of the universal concepts of pride and responsibility, just as on the level of sound structure
one might appeal to a principle of universal phonetics to account for the fact
that when a velar consonant becomes palatal it ordinarily becomes strident (see
references in note 14, for discussion). The proposal looks less attractive when
applied to the case of 70, for example, with respect to the fact that proper use
of 70 implies that John is now alive. When we try to pursue such questions,
we soon become lost in a tangle of confused issues and murky problems, and
it is difficult to propose answers that carry any conviction. For this reason, I
am unable to discuss conditions on rules of semantic interpretation that might
be analogous to the conditions on syntactic and phonological rules mentioned
earlier.
Observe that I might well have been mistaken in the preceding remarks in
assuming that the topics discussed belong to syntax rather than to the semantic
component of a grammar, or to some domain in which semantic and syntactic
rules interpenetrate. The issues are too clouded for us to be able to say that this
is an empirical question, as matters now stand; but when they are sharpened, we
may find that an empirical question can be posed. Consider, for example, the
discussion of the erasure principle in syntax. Joseph Emonds has suggested (in
unpublished work) that it is incorrect to assume, as I did, that the sentences of
60 are interpreted through reference to the underlying structures of 61. Rather,
he argues that what I took to be the embedded proposition has no subject at all in
the underlying form generated by the syntactic component, and a general rule
of semantic interpretation takes the place of Rosenbaum’s erasure principle.
Whether this is correct I do not know, but it is certainly a possibility. We can
expect, as research continues into problems of grammar, that the boundaries
that seem clear today may shift in unpredictable ways, or that some new basis
for the organization of grammar may replace the framework that now seems
appropriate.
The conditions on grammatical rules that I have been discussing are complex
and only partially understood. It should be emphasized, however, that even some
of the simplest and clearest conditions of the form of grammar are in no sense
necessary properties of a system that fulfills the functions of human language.
Correspondingly, the fact that they hold true of human languages in general and

54

Language and Mind

play a role in the acquired linguistic competence of the speaker–hearer cannot
be lightly dismissed. Consider, for example, the simple fact that grammatical
transformations are invariably structure-dependent in the sense that they apply
to a string of words28 by virtue of the organization of these words into phrases.
It is easy to imagine structure-independent operations that apply to a string of
elements quite independently of its abstract structure as a system of phrases.
For example, the rule that forms the interrogatives of 71 from the corresponding
declaratives of 72 (see note 10) is a structure-dependent rule interchanging a
noun phrase with the first element of the auxiliary.
71

a. Will the members of the audience who enjoyed the play stand?
b. Has Mary lived in Princeton?
c. Will the subjects who will act as controls be paid?

72

a. The members of the audience who enjoyed the play will stand.
b. Mary has lived in Princeton.
c. The subjects who will act as controls will be paid.

In contrast, consider the operation that inverts the first and last words of a sentence, or that arranges the words of a sentence in increasing length in terms
of phonetic segments (“alphabetizing” in some specified way for items of the
same length), or that moves the left-most occurrence of the word “will” to the
extreme left – call these O1 , O2 , and O3 , respectively. Applying O1 to 72a,
we derive 73a; applying O2 to 72b, we derive 73b; applying O3 to 72c, we
derive 73c:
73

a. stand the members of the audience who enjoyed the play will
b. in has lived Mary Princeton
c. will the subjects who act as controls will be paid

The operations O1 , O2 , and O3 are structure-independent. Innumerable other
operations of this sort can be specified.
There is no a priori reason why human language should make use exclusively
of structure-dependent operations, such as English interrogation, instead of
structure-independent operations, such as O1 , O2 , and O3 . One can hardly argue
that the latter are more “complex” in some absolute sense; nor can they be
shown to be more productive of ambiguity or more harmful to communicative
efficiency. Yet no human language contains structure-independent operations
among (or replacing) the structure-dependent grammatical transformations. The
language-learner knows that the operation that gives 71 is a possible candidate
for a grammar, whereas O1 , O2 , and O3 , and any operations like them, need not
be considered as tentative hypotheses.
28

More properly, to a string of minimal linguistic units that may or may not be words.

Linguistic contributions: present

55

If we establish the proper “psychic distance” from such elementary and
commonplace phenomena as these, we will see that they really pose some
nontrivial problems for human psychology. We can speculate about the reason
for the reliance on structure-dependent operations,29 but we must recognize
that any such speculation must involve assumptions regarding human cognitive
capacities that are by no means obvious or necessary. And it is difficult to avoid
the conclusion that whatever its function may be, the reliance on structuredependent operations must be predetermined for the language-learner by a
restrictive initial schematism of some sort that directs his attempts to acquire
linguistic competence. Similar conclusions seem to me warranted, a fortiori, in
the case of the deeper and more intricate principles discussed earlier, whatever
their exact form may turn out to be.
To summarize: along the lines that have been outlined here, we might develop
on the one hand a system of general principles of universal grammar,30 and on
the other, particular grammars that are formed and interpreted in accordance
with these principles. The interplay of universal principles and particular rules
leads to empirical consequences such as those we have illustrated; at various
levels of depth, these rules and principles provide explanations for facts about
linguistic competence – the knowledge of language possessed by each normal
speaker – and about some of the ways in which this knowledge is put to use in
the performance of the speaker or hearer.
The principles of universal grammar provide a highly restrictive schema
to which any human language must conform, as well as specific conditions
determining how the grammar of any such language can be used. It is easy to
imagine alternatives to the conditions that have been formulated (or those that
are often tacitly assumed). These conditions have in the past generally escaped
notice, and we know very little about them today. If we manage to establish the
appropriate “psychic distance” from the relevant phenomena and succeed in
“making them strange” to ourselves, we see at once that they pose very serious
problems that cannot be talked or defined out of existence. Careful consideration
of such problems as those sketched here indicates that to account for the normal
29

30

See G. A. Miller and N. Chomsky, “Finitary Models of Language Users, Part II,” in R. D. Luce,
R. Bush, and E. Galanter, eds., Handbook of Mathematical Psychology, Vol. II (New York:
Wiley, 1963), for some proposals regarding this matter.
Notice that we are interpreting “universal grammar” as a system of conditions on grammars. It
may involve a skeletal substructure of rules that any human language must contain, but it also
incorporates conditions that must be met by such grammars and principles that determine how
they are interpreted. This formulation is something of a departure from a traditional view that
took universal grammar to be simply a substructure of each particular grammar, a system of
rules at the very core of each grammar. This traditional view has also received expression in
recent work. It seems to me to have little merit. As far as information is available, there are heavy
constraints on the form and interpretation of grammar at all levels, from the deep structures of
syntax, through the transformational component, to the rules that interpret syntactic structures
semantically and phonetically.

56

Language and Mind

use of language we must attribute to the speaker–hearer an intricate system
of rules that involve mental operations of a very abstract nature, applying to
representations that are quite remote from the physical signal. We observe,
furthermore, that knowledge of language is acquired on the basis of degenerate
and restricted data and that it is to a large extent independent of intelligence
and of wide variations in individual experience.
If a scientist were faced with the problem of determining the nature of a
device of unknown properties that operates on data of the sort available to a
child and gives as “output” (that is, as a “final state of the device,” in this case) a
particular grammar of the sort that it seems necessary to attribute to the person
who knows the language, he would naturally search for inherent principles of
organization that determine the form of the output on the basis of the limited
data available. There is no reason to adopt a more prejudiced or dogmatic view
when the device of unknown properties is the human mind; specifically, there
is no reason to suppose, in advance of any argument, that the general empiricist
assumptions that have dominated speculation about these matters have any
particular privileged claim. No one has succeeded in showing why the highly
specific empiricist assumptions about how knowledge is acquired should be
taken seriously. They appear to offer no way to describe or account for the
most characteristic and normal constructions of human intelligence, such as
linguistic competence. On the other hand, certain highly specific assumptions
about particular and universal grammar give some hope of accounting for the
phenomena that we face when we consider knowledge and use of language.
Speculating about the future, it seems not unlikely that continued research
along the lines indicated here will bring to light a highly restrictive schematism
that determines both the content of experience and the nature of the knowledge
that arises from it, thus vindicating and elaborating some traditional thinking
about problems of language and mind. It is to this matter, among others, that I
shall turn in the final lecture.

3

Linguistic contributions to the study
of mind: future

In discussing the past, I referred to two major traditions that have enriched
the study of language in their separate and very different ways; and in my last
lecture, I tried to give some indication of the topics that seem on the immediate
horizon today, as a kind of synthesis of philosophical grammar and structural
linguistics begins to take shape. Each of the major traditions of study and
speculation that I have been using as a point of reference was associated with a
certain characteristic approach to the problems of mind; we might say, without
distortion, that each evolved as a specific branch of the psychology of its time,
to which it made a distinctive contribution.
It may seem a bit paradoxical to speak of structural linguistics in this way,
given its militant anti-psychologism. But the paradox is lessened when we take
note of the fact that this militant anti-psychologism is no less true of much of
contemporary psychology itself, particularly of those branches that until a few
years ago monopolized the study of use and acquisition of language. We live,
after all, in the age of “behavioral science,” not of “the science of mind.” I do not
want to read too much into a terminological innovation, but I think that there is
some significance in the ease and willingness with which modern thinking about
man and society accepts the designation “behavioral science.” No sane person
has ever doubted that behavior provides much of the evidence for this study –
all of the evidence, if we interpret “behavior” in a sufficiently loose sense. But
the term “behavioral science” suggests a not-so-subtle shift of emphasis toward
the evidence itself and away from the deeper underlying principles and abstract
mental structures that might be illuminated by the evidence of behavior. It is as
if natural science were to be designated “the science of meter readings.” What,
in fact, would we expect of natural science in a culture that was satisfied to
accept this designation for its activities?
Behavioral science has been much preoccupied with data and organization of
data, and it has even seen itself as a kind of technology of control of behavior.
Anti-mentalism in linguistics and in philosophy of language conforms to this
shift of orientation. As I mentioned in my first lecture, I think that one major
indirect contribution of modern structural linguistics results from its success in
making explicit the assumptions of an anti-mentalistic, thoroughly operational
57

58

Language and Mind

and behaviorist approach to the phenomena of language. By extending this
approach to its natural limits, it laid the groundwork for a fairly conclusive
demonstration of the inadequacy of any such approach to the problems of mind.
More generally, I think that the long-range significance of the study of language lies in the fact that in this study it is possible to give a relatively sharp
and clear formulation of some of the central questions of psychology and to
bring a mass of evidence to bear on them. What is more, the study of language
is, for the moment, unique in the combination it affords of richness of data and
susceptibility to sharp formulation of basic issues.
It would, of course, be silly to try to predict the future of research, and it will
be understood that I do not intend the subtitle of this lecture to be taken very
seriously. Nevertheless, it is fair to suppose that the major contribution of the
study of language will lie in the understanding it can provide as to the character
of mental processes and the structures they form and manipulate. Therefore,
instead of speculating on the likely course of research into the problems that
are coming into focus today,1 I will concentrate here on some of the issues that
arise when we try to develop the study of linguistic structure as a chapter of
human psychology.
It is quite natural to expect that a concern for language will remain central
to the study of human nature, as it has been in the past. Anyone concerned
with the study of human nature and human capacities must somehow come to
grips with the fact that all normal humans acquire language, whereas acquisition of even its barest rudiments is quite beyond the capacities of an otherwise intelligent ape – a fact that was emphasized, quite correctly, in Cartesian
philosophy.2 It is widely thought that the extensive modern studies of animal
communication challenge this classical view; and it is almost universally taken
1

2

A number of such problems might be enumerated – for example, the problem of how the intrinsic
content of phonetic features determines the functioning of phonological rules, the role of universal
formal conditions in restricting the choice of grammars and the empirical interpretation of such
grammars, the relations of syntactic and semantic structure, the nature of universal semantics,
performance models that incorporate generative grammars, and so on.
Modern attempts to train apes in behavior that the investigators regard as language-like confirm
this incapacity, though it may be that the failures are to be attributed to the technique of operant
conditioning and therefore show little about the animal’s actual abilities. See, for example, the
report by C. B. Ferster, “Arithmetic Behavior in Chimpanzees,” in Scientific American, May 1964,
pp. 98–106. Ferster attempted to teach chimpanzees to match the binary numbers 001, . . . , 111
to sets of one to seven objects. He reports that hundreds of thousands of trials were required for
95 percent accuracy to be achieved, even in this trivial task. Of course, even at this stage the apes
had not learned the principle of binary arithmetic; they would not, for example, be able to match
a four-digit binary number correctly, and, presumably, they would have done just as badly in
the experiment had it involved an arbitrary association of the binary numbers to sets rather than
the association determined by the principle of the binary notation. Ferster overlooks this crucial
point and therefore concludes, mistakenly, that he has taught the rudiments of symbolic behavior.
The confusion is compounded by his definition of language as “a set of symbolic stimuli that
control behavior” and by his strange belief that the “effectiveness” of language arises from the
fact that utterances “control almost identical performances in speaker and listener.”

Linguistic contributions: future

59

for granted that there exists a problem of explaining the “evolution” of human
language from systems of animal communication. However, a careful look at
recent studies of animal communication seems to me to provide little support
for these assumptions. Rather, these studies simply bring out even more clearly
the extent to which human language appears to be a unique phenomenon, without significant analogue in the animal world. If this is so, it is quite senseless
to raise the problem of explaining the evolution of human language from more
primitive systems of communication that appear at lower levels of intellectual capacity. The issue is important, and I would like to dwell on it for a
moment.
The assumption that human language evolved from more primitive systems
is developed in an interesting way by Karl Popper in his recently published
Arthur Compton Lecture, “Clouds and Clocks.” He tries to show how problems of freedom of will and Cartesian dualism can be solved by the analysis
of this “evolution.” I am not concerned now with the philosophical conclusions that he draws from this analysis, but with the basic assumption that there
is an evolutionary development of language from simpler systems of the sort
that one discovers in other organisms. Popper argues that the evolution of language passed through several stages, in particular a “lower stage” in which
vocal gestures are used for expression of emotional state, for example, and a
“higher stage” in which articulated sound is used for expression of thought – in
Popper’s terms, for description and critical argument. His discussion of stages
of evolution of language suggests a kind of continuity, but in fact he establishes
no relation between the lower and higher stages and does not suggest a mechanism whereby transition can take place from one stage to the next. In short,
he gives no argument to show that the stages belong to a single evolutionary
process. In fact, it is difficult to see what links these stages at all (except for
the metaphorical use of the term “language”). There is no reason to suppose
that the “gaps” are bridgeable. There is no more of a basis for assuming an
evolutionary development of “higher” from “lower” stages, in this case, than
there is for assuming an evolutionary development from breathing to walking;
the stages have no significant analogy, it appears, and seem to involve entirely
different processes and principles.
A more explicit discussion of the relation between human language and animal communication systems appears in a recent discussion by the comparative
ethologist W. H. Thorpe.3 He points out that mammals other than man appear
to lack the human ability to imitate sounds, and that one might therefore have
expected birds (many of which have this ability to a remarkable extent) to
3

W. H. Thorpe, “Animal Vocalization and Communication,” in F. L. Darley, ed., Brain Mechanisms
Underlying Speech and Language (New York: Grune and Stratton, 1967), pp. 2–10 and the
discussions on pp. 19 and 84–85.

60

Language and Mind

be “the group which ought to have been able to evolve language in the true
sense, and not the mammals.” Thorpe does not suggest that human language
“evolved” in any strict sense from simpler systems, but he does argue that the
characteristic properties of human language can be found in animal communication systems, although “we cannot at the moment say definitely that they
are all present in one particular animal.” The characteristics shared by human
and animal language are the properties of being “purposive,” “syntactic,” and
“propositional.” Language is purposive “in that there is nearly always in human
speech a definite intention of getting something over to somebody else, altering
his behavior, his thoughts, or his general attitude toward a situation.” Human
language is “syntactic” in that an utterance is a performance with an internal organization, with structure and coherence. It is “propositional” in that it
transmits information. In this sense, then, both human language and animal
communication are purposive, syntactic, and propositional.
All this may be true, but it establishes very little, since when we move to
the level of abstraction at which human language and animal communication
fall together, almost all other behavior is included as well. Consider walking:
clearly, walking is purposive behavior, in the most general sense of “purposive.”
Walking is also “syntactic” in the sense just defined, as, in fact, Karl Lashley
pointed out a long time ago in his important discussion of serial order in behavior, to which I referred in the first lecture.4 Furthermore, it can certainly be
informative; for example, I can signal my interest in reaching a certain goal by
the speed or intensity with which I walk.
It is, incidentally, precisely in this manner that the examples of animal communication that Thorpe presents are “propositional.” He cites as an example
the song of the European robin, in which the rate of alternation of high and
low pitch signals the intention of the bird to defend its territory; the higher the
rate of alternation, the greater the intention to defend the territory. The example is interesting, but it seems to me to show very clearly the hopelessness
of the attempt to relate human language to animal communication. Every animal communication system that is known (if we disregard some science fiction
about dolphins) uses one of two basic principles: either it consists of a fixed,
finite number of signals, each associated with a specific range of behavior or
emotional state, as is illustrated in the extensive primate studies that have been
carried out by Japanese scientists for the past several years; or it makes use of a
fixed, finite number of linguistic dimensions, each of which is associated with a
particular nonlinguistic dimension in such a way that selection of a point along
the linguistic dimension determines and signals a certain point along the associated nonlinguistic dimension. The latter is the principle realized in Thorpe’s
4

K. S. Lashley, “The Problem of Serial Order in Behavior,” in L. A. Jeffress, ed., Cerebral
Mechanisms in Behavior (New York: Wiley, 1951), pp. 112–36.

Linguistic contributions: future

61

bird-song example. Rate of alternation of high and low pitch is a linguistic
dimension correlated with the nonlinguistic dimension of intention to defend
a territory. The bird signals its intention to defend a territory by selecting a
correlated point along the linguistic dimension of pitch alternation – I use the
word “select” loosely, of course. The linguistic dimension is abstract, but the
principle is clear. A communication system of the second type has an indefinitely large range of potential signals, as does human language. The mechanism
and principle, however, are entirely different from those employed by human
language to express indefinitely many new thoughts, intentions, feelings, and so
on. It is not correct to speak of a “deficiency” of the animal system, in terms of
range of potential signals; rather the opposite, since the animal system admits
in principle of continuous variation along the linguistic dimension (insofar as it
makes sense to speak of “continuity” in such a case), whereas human language is
discrete. Hence, the issue is not one of “more” or “less,” but rather of an entirely
different principle of organization. When I make some arbitrary statement in a
human language – say, that “the rise of supranational corporations poses new
dangers for human freedom” – I am not selecting a point along some linguistic
dimension that signals a corresponding point along an associated nonlinguistic
dimension, nor am I selecting a signal from a finite behavioral repertoire, innate
or learned.
Furthermore, it is wrong to think of human use of language as characteristically informative, in fact or in intention. Human language can be used to
inform or mislead, to clarify one’s own thoughts or to display one’s cleverness,
or simply for play. If I speak with no concern for modifying your behavior or
thoughts, I am not using language any less than if I say exactly the same things
with such intention. If we hope to understand human language and the psychological capacities on which it rests, we must first ask what it is, not how or for
what purposes it is used. When we ask what human language is, we find no
striking similarity to animal communication systems. There is nothing useful
to be said about behavior or thought at the level of abstraction at which animal
and human communication fall together. The examples of animal communication that have been examined to date do share many of the properties of human
gestural systems, and it might be reasonable to explore the possibility of direct
connection in this case. But human language, it appears, is based on entirely
different principles. This, I think, is an important point, often overlooked by
those who approach human language as a natural, biological phenomenon; in
particular, it seems rather pointless, for these reasons, to speculate about the
evolution of human language from simpler systems – perhaps as absurd as it
would be to speculate about the “evolution” of atoms from clouds of elementary
particles.
As far as we know, possession of human language is associated with a specific type of mental organization, not simply a higher degree of intelligence.

62

Language and Mind

There seems to be no substance to the view that human language is simply
a more complex instance of something to be found elsewhere in the animal
world. This poses a problem for the biologist, since, if true, it is an example of
true “emergence” – the appearance of a qualitatively different phenomenon at
a specific stage of complexity of organization. Recognition of this fact, though
formulated in entirely different terms, is what motivated much of the classical
study of language by those whose primary concern was the nature of mind. And
it seems to me that today there is no better or more promising way to explore
the essential and distinctive properties of human intelligence than through the
detailed investigation of the structure of this unique human possession. A reasonable guess, then, is that if empirically adequate generative grammars can be
constructed and the universal principles that govern their structure and organization determined, then this will be an important contribution to human psychology, in ways to which I will turn directly, in detail.
In the course of these lectures I have mentioned some of the classical ideas
regarding language structure and contemporary efforts to deepen and extend
them. It seems clear that we must regard linguistic competence – knowledge
of a language – as an abstract system underlying behavior, a system constituted by rules that interact to determine the form and intrinsic meaning of a
potentially infinite number of sentences. Such a system – a generative grammar – provides an explication of the Humboldtian idea of “form of language,”
which in an obscure but suggestive remark in his great posthumous work, Über
die Verschiedenheit des Menschlichen Sprachbaues, Humboldt defines as “that
constant and unvarying system of processes underlying the mental act of raising
articulated structurally organized signals to an expression of thought.” Such a
grammar defines a language in the Humboldtian sense, namely as “a recursively generated system, where the laws of generation are fixed and invariant,
but the scope and the specific manner in which they are applied remain entirely
unspecified.”
In each such grammar there are particular, idiosyncratic elements, selection
of which determines one specific human language; and there are general universal elements, conditions on the form and organization of any human language,
that form the subject matter for the study of “universal grammar.” Among the
principles of universal grammar are those I discussed in the preceding lecture –
for example, the principles that distinguish deep and surface structure and that
constrain the class of transformational operations that relate them. Notice, incidentally, that the existence of definite principles of universal grammar makes
possible the rise of the new field of mathematical linguistics, a field that submits to abstract study the class of generative systems meeting the conditions set
forth in universal grammar. This inquiry aims to elaborate the formal properties
of any possible human language. The field is in its infancy; it is only in the
last decade that the possibility of such an enterprise has been envisioned. It

Linguistic contributions: future

63

has some promising initial results, and it suggests one possible direction for
future research that might prove to be of great importance. Thus, mathematical
linguistics seems for the moment to be in a uniquely favorable position, among
mathematical approaches in the social and psychological sciences, to develop
not simply as a theory of data, but as the study of highly abstract principles and
structures that determine the character of human mental processes. In this case,
the mental processes in question are those involved in the organization of one
specific domain of human knowledge, namely knowledge of language.
The theory of generative grammar, both particular and universal, points to a
conceptual lacuna in psychological theory that I believe is worth mentioning.
Psychology conceived as “behavioral science” has been concerned with behavior and acquisition or control of behavior. It has no concept corresponding to
“competence,” in the sense in which competence is characterized by a generative grammar. The theory of learning has limited itself to a narrow and surely
inadequate concept of what is learned – namely a system of stimulus-response
connections, a network of associations, a repertoire of behavioral items, a habit
hierarchy, or a system of dispositions to respond in a particular way under specifiable stimulus conditions.5 Insofar as behavioral psychology has been applied
to education or therapy, it has correspondingly limited itself to this concept of
“what is learned.” But a generative grammar cannot be characterized in these
terms. What is necessary, in addition to the concept of behavior and learning,
is a concept of what is learned – a notion of competence – that lies beyond the
conceptual limits of behaviorist psychological theory. Like much of modern linguistics and modern philosophy of language, behaviorist psychology has quite
consciously accepted methodological restrictions that do not permit the study
of systems of the necessary complexity and abstractness.6 One important future
5

6

This limitation is revealed, for example, in such statements as this from W. M. Wiest, in “Recent
Criticisms of Behaviorism and Learning,” in Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 67, No. 3, 1967,
pp. 214–25: “An empirical demonstration . . . that a child has learned the rules of grammar
would be his exhibiting the verbal performance called ‘uttering the rules of grammar.’ That this
performance is not usually acquired without special training is attested to by many grammar
school teachers. One may even speak quite grammatically without having literally learned the
rules of grammar.” Wiest’s inability to conceive of another sense in which the child may be said
to have learned the rules of grammar testifies to the conceptual gap we are discussing. Since he
refuses to consider the question of what is learned, and to clarify this notion before asking how it
is learned, he can only conceive of “grammar” as the “behavioral regularities in the understanding
and production of speech” – a characterization that is perfectly empty, as it stands, there being
no “behavioral regularities” associated with (let alone “in”) the understanding and production of
speech. One cannot quarrel with the desire of some investigators to study “the acquisition and
maintenance of actual occurrences of verbal behavior” (ibid.). It remains to be demonstrated
that this study has something to do with the study of language. As of now, I see no indication
that this claim can be substantiated.
See my paper, “Some Empirical Assumptions in Modern Philosophy of Language,” in
S. Morgenbesser, P. Suppes, and M. White, eds., Essays in Honor of Ernest Nagel (New York:
St. Martin’s, 1969), for a discussion of the work of Quine and Wittgenstein from this point of
view.

64

Language and Mind

contribution of the study of language to general psychology may be to focus
attention on this conceptual gap and to demonstrate how it may be filled by
the elaboration of a system of underlying competence in one domain of human
intelligence.
There is an obvious sense in which any aspect of psychology is based ultimately on the observation of behavior. But it is not at all obvious that the study
of learning should proceed directly to the investigation of factors that control
behavior or of conditions under which a “behavioral repertoire” is established.
It is first necessary to determine the significant characteristics of this behavioral
repertoire, the principles on which it is organized. A meaningful study of learning can proceed only after this preliminary task has been carried out and has
led to a reasonably well-confirmed theory of underlying competence – in the
case of language, to the formulation of the generative grammar that underlies
the observed use of language. Such a study will concern itself with the relation
between the data available to the organism and the competence that it acquires;
only to the extent that the abstraction to competence has been successful – in
the case of language, to the extent that the postulated grammar is “descriptively adequate” in the sense described in Lecture 2 – can the investigation of
learning hope to achieve meaningful results. If, in some domain, the organization of the behavioral repertoire is quite trivial and elementary, then there
will be little harm in avoiding the intermediate stage of theory construction, in
which we attempt to characterize accurately the competence that is acquired.
But one cannot count on this being the case, and in the study of language it
surely is not the case. With a richer and more adequate characterization of
“what is learned” – of the underlying competence that constitutes the “final
state” of the organism being studied – it may be possible to approach the task
of constructing a theory of learning that will be much less restricted in scope
than modern behavioral psychology has proved to be. Surely it is pointless to
accept methodological strictures that preclude such an approach to problems of
learning.
Are there other areas of human competence where one might hope to develop
a fruitful theory, analogous to generative grammar? Although this is a very
important question, there is very little that can be said about it today. One might,
for example, consider the problem of how a person comes to acquire a certain
concept of three-dimensional space, or an implicit “theory of human action,”
in similar terms. Such a study would begin with the attempt to characterize
the implicit theory that underlies actual performance and would then turn to
the question of how this theory develops under the given conditions of time
and access to data – that is, in what way the resulting system of beliefs is
determined by the interplay of available data, “heuristic procedures,” and the
innate schematism that restricts and conditions the form of the acquired system.
At the moment, this is nothing more than a sketch of a program of research.

Linguistic contributions: future

65

There have been some attempts to study the structure of other, languagelike systems – the study of kinship systems and folk taxonomies comes to
mind, for example. But so far, at least, nothing has been discovered that is even
roughly comparable to language in these domains. No one, to my knowledge,
has devoted more thought to this problem than Lévi-Strauss. For example, his
recent book on the categories of primitive mentality7 is a serious and thoughtful
attempt to come to grips with this problem. Nevertheless, I do not see what
conclusions can be reached from a study of his materials beyond the fact that
the savage mind attempts to impose some organization on the physical world –
that humans classify, if they perform any mental acts at all. Specifically, LéviStrauss’s well-known critique of totemism seems to reduce to little more than
this conclusion.
Lévi-Strauss models his investigations quite consciously on structural linguistics, particularly on the work of Troubetzkoy and Jakobson. He repeatedly
and quite correctly emphasizes that one cannot simply apply procedures analogous to those of phonemic analysis to subsystems of society and culture. Rather,
he is concerned with structures “where they may be found . . . in the kinship
system, political ideology, mythology, ritual, art,” and so on,8 and he wishes
to examine the formal properties of these structures in their own terms. But
several reservations are necessary when structural linguistics is used as a model
in this way. For one thing, the structure of a phonological system is of very
little interest as a formal object; there is nothing of significance to be said, from
a formal point of view, about a set of forty-odd elements cross-classified in
terms of eight or ten features. The significance of structuralist phonology, as
developed by Troubetzkoy, Jakobson, and others, lies not in the formal properties of phonemic systems but in the fact that a fairly small number of features
that can be specified in absolute, language-independent terms appear to provide
the basis for the organization of all phonological systems. The achievement of
structuralist phonology was to show that the phonological rules of a great variety of languages apply to classes of elements that can be simply characterized
in terms of these features; that historical change affects such classes in a uniform way; and that the organization of features plays a basic role in the use and
acquisition of language. This was a discovery of the greatest importance, and
it provides the groundwork for much of contemporary linguistics. But if we
abstract away from the specific universal set of features and the rule systems in
which they function, little of any significance remains.
Furthermore, to a greater and greater extent, current work in phonology is
demonstrating that the real richness of phonological systems lies not in the
structural patterns of phonemes but rather in the intricate systems of rules by
7
8

C. Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967).
C. Lévi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology (New York: Basic Books, 1963), p. 85.

66

Language and Mind

which these patterns are formed, modified, and elaborated.9 The structural patterns that arise at various stages of derivation are a kind of epiphenomenon.
The system of phonological rules makes use of the universal features in a fundamental way,10 but it is the properties of the systems of rules, it seems to me,
that really shed light on the specific nature of the organization of language.
For example, there appear to be very general conditions, such as the principle of cyclic ordering (discussed in the preceding lecture) and others that are
still more abstract, that govern the application of these rules, and there are
many interesting and unsolved questions as to how the choice of rules is determined by intrinsic, universal relations among features. Furthermore, the idea
of a mathematical investigation of language structures, to which Lévi-Strauss
occasionally alludes, becomes meaningful only when one considers systems
of rules with infinite generative capacity. There is nothing to be said about
the abstract structure of the various patterns that appear at various stages of
derivation. If this is correct, then one cannot expect structuralist phonology, in
itself, to provide a useful model for investigation of other cultural and social
systems.
In general, the problem of extending concepts of linguistic structure to other
cognitive systems seems to me, for the moment, in not too promising a state,
although it is no doubt too early for pessimism.
Before turning to the general implications of the study of linguistic competence and, more specifically, to the conclusions of universal grammar, it is well
to make sure of the status of these conclusions in the light of current knowledge
of the possible diversity of language. In my first lecture, I quoted the remarks of
William Dwight Whitney about what he referred to as “the infinite diversity of
human speech,” the boundless variety that, he maintained, undermines the
claims of philosophical grammar to psychological relevance.
Philosophical grammarians had typically maintained that languages vary little in their deep structures, though there may be wide variability in surface
manifestations. Thus there is, in this view, an underlying structure of grammatical relations and categories, and certain aspects of human thought and mentality
are essentially invariant across languages, although languages may differ as to
whether they express the grammatical relations formally by inflection or word
order, for example. Furthermore, an investigation of their work indicates that the
underlying recursive principles that generate deep structure were assumed to be
restricted in certain ways – for example, by the condition that new structures are
formed only by the insertion of new “propositional content,” new structures that
themselves correspond to actual simple sentences, in fixed positions in already
9
10

See discussion in the preceding lecture and the references cited there.
The study of universal features is itself in considerable flux. See N. Chomsky and M. Halle, The
Sound Pattern of English (New York: Harper & Row, 1968), Chapter 7, for recent discussion.

Linguistic contributions: future

67

formed structures. Similarly, the grammatical transformations that form surface structures through reordering, ellipsis, and other formal operations must
themselves meet certain fixed general conditions, such as those discussed in the
preceding lecture. In short, the theories of philosophical grammar, and the more
recent elaborations of these theories, make the assumption that languages will
differ very little, despite considerable diversity in superficial realization, when
we discover their deeper structures and unearth their fundamental mechanisms
and principles.
It is interesting to observe that this assumption persisted even through the
period of German romanticism, which was, of course, much preoccupied with
the diversity of cultures and with the many rich possibilities for human intellectual development. Thus, Wilhelm von Humboldt, who is now best remembered for his ideas concerning the variety of languages and the association of
diverse language structures with divergent “world-views,” nevertheless held
firmly that underlying any human language we will find a system that is universal, that simply expresses man’s unique intellectual attributes. For this reason,
it was possible for him to maintain the rationalist view that language is not
really learned – certainly not taught – but rather develops “from within,” in an
essentially predetermined way, when the appropriate environmental conditions
exist. One cannot really teach a first language, he argued, but can only “provide
the thread along which it will develop of its own accord,” by processes more
like maturation than learning. This Platonistic element in Humboldt’s thought
is a pervasive one; for Humboldt, it was as natural to propose an essentially
Platonistic theory of “learning” as it was for Rousseau to found his critique of
repressive social institutions on a conception of human freedom that derives
from strictly Cartesian assumptions regarding the limitations of mechanical
explanation. And in general it seems appropriate to construe both the psychology and the linguistics of the romantic period as in large part a natural outgrowth
of rationalist conceptions.11
The issue raised by Whitney against Humboldt and philosophical grammar
in general is of great significance with respect to the implications of linguistics for general human psychology. Evidently, these implications can be truly
far-reaching only if the rationalist view is essentially correct, in which case the
structure of language can truly serve as a “mirror of mind,” in both its particular and its universal aspects. It is widely believed that modern anthropology
has established the falsity of the assumptions of the rationalist universal grammarians by demonstrating through empirical study that languages may, in fact,
exhibit the widest diversity. Whitney’s claims regarding the diversity of languages are reiterated throughout the modern period; Martin Joos, for example,
11

For some discussion of these matters, see my Cartesian Linguistics (New York: Harper & Row,
1966).

68

Language and Mind

is simply expressing the conventional wisdom when he takes the basic conclusion of modern anthropological linguistics to be that “languages can differ
without limit as to either extent or direction.”12
The belief that anthropological linguistics has demolished the assumptions
of universal grammar seems to me to be quite false in two important respects.
First, it misinterprets the views of classical rationalist grammar, which held that
languages are similar only at the deeper level, the level at which grammatical
relations are expressed and at which the processes that provide for the creative
aspect of language use are to be found. Second, this belief seriously misinterprets the findings of anthropological linguistics, which has, in fact, restricted
itself almost completely to fairly superficial aspects of language structure.
To say this is not to criticize anthropological linguistics, a field that is faced
with compelling problems of its own – in particular, the problem of obtaining at least some record of the rapidly vanishing languages of the primitive
world. Nevertheless, it is important to bear in mind this fundamental limitation on its achievements in considering the light it can shed on the theses of
universal grammar. Anthropological studies (like structural linguistic studies
in general) do not attempt to reveal the underlying core of generative processes
in language – that is, the processes that determine the deeper levels of structure and that constitute the systematic means for creating ever novel sentence
types. Therefore, they obviously cannot have any real bearing on the classical
assumption that these underlying generative processes vary only slightly from
language to language. In fact, what evidence is now available suggests that if
universal grammar has serious defects, as indeed it does from a modern point
of view, then these defects lie in the failure to recognize the abstract nature of
linguistic structure and to impose sufficiently strong and restrictive conditions
on the form of any human language. And a characteristic feature of current
work in linguistics is its concern for linguistic universals of a sort that can only
be detected through a detailed investigation of particular languages, universals
governing properties of language that are simply not accessible to investigation within the restricted framework that has been adopted, often for very good
reasons, within anthropological linguistics.
I think that if we contemplate the classical problem of psychology, that of
accounting for human knowledge, we cannot avoid being struck by the enormous disparity between knowledge and experience – in the case of language,
between the generative grammar that expresses the linguistic competence of the
12

M. Joos, ed., Readings in Linguistics, 4th edn. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966),
p. 228. This is put forth as the “Boas Tradition.” American linguistics, Joos maintains, “got its
decisive direction when it was decided that an indigenous language could be described without
any preexistent scheme of what a language must be . . .” (p. 1). Of course this could not literally
be true – the procedures of analysis themselves express a hypothesis concerning the possible
diversity of language. But there is, nevertheless, much justice in Joos’s characterization.

Linguistic contributions: future

69

native speaker and the meager and degenerate data on the basis of which he has
constructed this grammar for himself. In principle the theory of learning should
deal with this problem; but in fact it bypasses the problem, because of the conceptual gap that I mentioned earlier. The problem cannot even be formulated
in any sensible way until we develop the concept of competence, alongside the
concepts of learning and behavior, and apply this concept in some domain. The
fact is that this concept has so far been extensively developed and applied only
in the study of human language. It is only in this domain that we have at least the
first steps toward an account of competence, namely the fragmentary generative
grammars that have been constructed for particular languages. As the study of
language progresses, we can expect with some confidence that these grammars
will be extended in scope and depth, although it will hardly come as a surprise
if the first proposals are found to be mistaken in fundamental ways.
Insofar as we have a tentative first approximation to a generative grammar
for some language, we can for the first time formulate in a useful way the
problem of origin of knowledge. In other words, we can ask the question, What
initial structure must be attributed to the mind that enables it to construct such
a grammar from the data of sense? Some of the empirical conditions that must
be met by any such assumption about innate structure are moderately clear.
Thus, it appears to be a species-specific capacity that is essentially independent
of intelligence, and we can make a fairly good estimate of the amount of data
that is necessary for the task to be successfully accomplished. We know that
the grammars that are in fact constructed vary only slightly among speakers
of the same language, despite wide variations not only in intelligence but also
in the conditions under which language is acquired. As participants in a certain
culture, we are naturally aware of the great differences in ability to use language,
in knowledge of vocabulary, and so on that result from differences in native
ability and from differences in conditions of acquisition; we naturally pay much
less attention to the similarities and to common knowledge, which we take for
granted. But if we manage to establish the requisite psychic distance, if we
actually compare the generative grammars that must be postulated for different
speakers of the same language, we find that the similarities that we take for
granted are quite marked and that the divergences are few and marginal. What
is more, it seems that dialects that are superficially quite remote, even barely
intelligible on first contact, share a vast central core of common rules and
processes and differ very slightly in underlying structures, which seem to remain
invariant through long historical eras. Furthermore, we discover a substantial
system of principles that do not vary among languages that are, as far as we
know, entirely unrelated.
The central problems in this domain are empirical ones that are, in principle
at least, quite straightforward, difficult as they may be to solve in a satisfactory
way. We must postulate an innate structure that is rich enough to account for

70

Language and Mind

the disparity between experience and knowledge, one that can account for the
construction of the empirically justified generative grammars within the given
limitations of time and access to data. At the same time, this postulated innate
mental structure must not be so rich and restrictive as to exclude certain known
languages. There is, in other words, an upper bound and a lower bound on the
degree and exact character of the complexity that can be postulated as innate
mental structure. The factual situation is obscure enough to leave room for
much difference of opinion over the true nature of this innate mental structure
that makes acquisition of language possible. However, there seems to me to be
no doubt that this is an empirical issue, one that can be resolved by proceeding
along the lines that I have just roughly outlined.
My own estimate of the situation is that the real problem for tomorrow is that
of discovering an assumption regarding innate structure that is sufficiently rich,
not that of finding one that is simple or elementary enough to be “plausible.”
There is, as far as I can see, no reasonable notion of “plausibility,” no a priori
insight into what innate structures are permissible, that can guide the search
for a “sufficiently elementary assumption.” It would be mere dogmatism to
maintain without argument or evidence that the mind is simpler in its innate
structure than other biological systems, just as it would be mere dogmatism
to insist that the mind’s organization must necessarily follow certain set principles, determined in advance of investigation and maintained in defiance of
any empirical findings. I think that the study of problems of mind has been
very definitely hampered by a kind of apriorism with which these problems
are generally approached. In particular, the empiricist assumptions that have
dominated the study of acquisition of knowledge for many years seem to me to
have been adopted quite without warrant and to have no special status among
the many possibilities that one might imagine as to how the mind functions.
In this connection, it is illuminating to follow the debate that has arisen since
the views I have just sketched were advanced a few years ago as a program
of research – I should say, since this position was resurrected, because to a
significant extent it is the traditional rationalist approach, now amplified and
sharpened and made far more explicit in terms of the tentative conclusions that
have been reached in the recent study of linguistic competence. Two outstanding American philosophers, Nelson Goodman and Hilary Putnam, have made
recent contributions to this discussion – both misconceived, in my opinion, but
instructive in the misconceptions that they reveal.13
13

N. Goodman, “The Epistemological Argument,” and H. Putnam, “The Innateness Hypothesis
and Explanatory Models in Linguistics.” Together with a paper of mine, these were presented at the Innate Ideas Symposium of the American Philosophical Association and the
Boston Colloquium for the Philosophy of Science in December 1966. The three essays appear
in Synthèse, Vol. 17, No. 1, 1967, pp. 2–28, and in R. S. Cohen and W. M. Wartofsky,
eds., Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. III (New York: Humanities, 1968),

Linguistic contributions: future

71

Goodman’s treatment of the question suffers first from an historical misunderstanding and second from a failure to formulate correctly the exact nature
of the problem of acquisition of knowledge. His historical misunderstanding
has to do with the issue between Locke and whomever Locke thought he was
criticizing in his discussion of innate ideas. According to Goodman, “Locke
made . . . acutely clear” that the doctrine of innate ideas is “false or meaningless.”
In fact, however, Locke’s critique had little relevance to any familiar doctrine
of the seventeenth century. The arguments that Locke gave were considered
and dealt with in quite a satisfactory way in the earliest seventeenth-century
discussions of innate ideas, for example those of Lord Herbert and Descartes,
both of whom took for granted that the system of innate ideas and principles
would not function unless appropriate stimulation took place. For this reason,
Locke’s arguments, none of which took cognizance of this condition, are without force;14 for some reason, he avoided the issues that had been discussed in
the preceding half-century. Furthermore, as Leibnitz observed, Locke’s willingness to make use of a principle of “reflection” makes it almost impossible
to distinguish his approach from that of the rationalists, except for his failure
to take even those steps suggested by his predecessors toward specifying the
character of this principle.
But, historical issues aside, I think that Goodman misconstrues the substantive problem as well. He argues that first-language learning poses no real
problem, because prior to first-language learning the child has already acquired
the rudiments of a symbolic system in his ordinary dealings with the environment. Hence, first-language learning is analogous to second-language learning
in that the fundamental step has already been taken, and details can be elaborated within an already existing framework. This argument might have some
force if it were possible to show that the specific properties of grammar – say,
the distinction of deep and surface structure, the specific properties of grammatical transformations, the principles of rule ordering, and so on – were present
in some form in these already acquired prelinguistic “symbolic systems.” But
since there is not the slightest reason to believe that this is so, the argument

14

pp. 81–107. A more extensive discussion of the papers of Putnam and Goodman, along with a
number of others, appears in my contribution to the symposium “Linguistics and Philosophy,”
New York University, April 1968, in S. Hook, ed., Philosophy and Language (New York: New
York University Press, 1969). The essay is reprinted in this volume.
This observation is a commonplace. See, for example, the commentary by A. C. Fraser in his
edition of Locke’s Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 1894 (reprinted by Dover, 1959),
notes 1 and 2, Chapter 1 (p. 38 of the Dover edition). As Fraser notes, Descartes’ position is
one “which Locke’s argument always fails to reach . . . Locke assails [the hypothesis of innate
ideas] . . . in its crudest form, in which it is countenanced by no eminent advocate.” Goodman is
free to use the term “innate idea” in conformity with Locke’s misinterpretation of the doctrine if
he wishes, but not to charge “sophistry,” as he does, when others examine and develop rationalist
doctrine in the form in which it was actually presented.

72

Language and Mind

collapses. It is based on an equivocation similar to that discussed earlier in connection with the argument that language evolved from animal communication.
In that case, as we observed, the argument turned on a metaphorical use of the
term “language.” In Goodman’s case, the argument is based entirely on a vague
use of the term “symbolic system,” and it collapses as soon as we attempt to give
this term a precise meaning. If it were possible to show that these prelinguistic
symbolic systems share certain significant properties with natural language,
we could then argue that these properties of natural language are acquired by
analogy. Of course, we would then face the problem of explaining how the
prelinguistic symbolic systems developed these properties. But since no one
has succeeded in showing that the fundamental properties of natural language –
those discussed in Lecture 2, for example – appear in prelinguistic symbolic
systems or any others, the latter problem does not arise.
According to Goodman, the reason why the problem of second-language
learning is different from that of first-language learning is that “once one language is available,” it “can be used for giving explanation and instruction.” He
then goes on to argue that “acquisition of an initial language is acquisition of a
secondary symbolic system” and is quite on a par with normal second-language
acquisition. The primary symbolic systems to which he refers are “rudimentary
prelinguistic symbolic systems in which gestures and sensory and perceptual
occurrences of all sorts function as signs.” But evidently these prelinguistic
symbolic systems cannot be “used for giving explanation and instruction” in
the way a first language can be used in second-language instruction. Therefore,
even on his own grounds, Goodman’s argument is incoherent.
Goodman maintains that “the claim we are discussing cannot be experimentally tested even when we have an acknowledged example of a ‘bad’ language”
and that “the claim has not even been formulated to the extent of citation of a
single general property of ‘bad’ languages.” The first of these conclusions is
correct, in his sense of “experimental test,” namely a test in which we “take an
infant at birth, isolate it from all the influences of our language-bound culture,
and attempt to inculcate it with one of the ‘bad’ artificial languages.” Obviously
this is not feasible. But there is no reason why we should be dismayed by the
impossibility of carrying out such a test as this. There are many other ways – for
example, those discussed in Lecture 2 and the references cited there – in which
evidence can be obtained concerning the properties of grammars and conclusions regarding the general properties of such grammars can be put to empirical
test. Any such conclusion immediately specifies, correctly or incorrectly, certain properties of “bad” languages. Since there are dozens of papers and books
that attempt to formulate such properties, his second claim, that not “a single
general property of ‘bad’ languages” has been formulated, is rather surprising.
One might try to show that these attempts are misguided or questionable, but
one can hardly maintain seriously that they do not exist. Any formulation of

Linguistic contributions: future

73

a principle of universal grammar makes a strong empirical claim, which can
be falsified by finding counter-instances in some human language, along the
lines of the discussion in Lecture 2. In linguistics, as in any other field, it is
only in such indirect ways as this that one can hope to find evidence bearing on
nontrivial hypotheses. Direct experimental tests of the sort that Goodman mentions are rarely possible, a matter that may be unfortunate but is nevertheless
characteristic of most research.
At one point Goodman remarks, correctly, that even though “for certain
remarkable facts I have no alternative explanation . . . that alone does not dictate acceptance of whatever theory may be offered; for the theory might be
worse than none. Inability to explain a fact does not condemn me to accept
an intrinsically repugnant and incomprehensible theory.” But now consider the
theory of innate ideas that Goodman regards as “intrinsically repugnant and
incomprehensible.” Notice, first, that the theory is obviously not “incomprehensible,” on his terms. Thus he appears to be willing, in this article, to accept
the view that in some sense the mature mind contains ideas; it is obviously not
“incomprehensible,” then, that some of these ideas are “implanted in the mind
as original equipment,” to use his phraseology. And if we turn to the actual doctrine as developed in rationalist philosophy, rather than Locke’s caricature, the
theory becomes even more obviously comprehensible. There is nothing incomprehensible in the view that stimulation provides the occasion for the mind to
apply certain innate interpretive principles, certain concepts that proceed from
“the power of understanding” itself, from the faculty of thinking rather than
from external objects directly. To take an example from Descartes (Reply to
Objections, V):
When first in infancy we see a triangular figure depicted on paper, this figure cannot
show us how a real triangle ought to be conceived, in the way in which geometricians
consider it, because the true triangle is contained in this figure, just as the statue of
Mercury is contained in a rough block of wood. But because we already possess within
us the idea of a true triangle, and it can be more easily conceived by our mind than the
more complex figure of the triangle drawn on paper, we, therefore, when we see the
composite figure, apprehend not it itself, but rather the authentic triangle.15

In this sense the idea of a triangle is innate. Surely the notion is comprehensible;
there would be no difficulty, for example, in programing a computer to react
to stimuli along these lines (though this would not satisfy Descartes, for other
reasons). Similarly, there is no difficulty in principle in programing a computer with a schematism that sharply restricts the form of a generative grammar, with an evaluation procedure for grammars of the given form, with a
15

E. S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross, eds., Descartes’ Philosophical Works, 1911 (reprinted by
Dover, 1955). The citation, and the preceding remarks, appear in my contribution to the Innate
Ideas Symposium of December 1966 (see note 13).

74

Language and Mind

technique for determining whether given data are compatible with a grammar
of the given form, with a fixed substructure of entities (such as distinctive features), rules, and principles, and so on – in short, with a universal grammar
of the sort that has been proposed in recent years. For reasons that I have
already mentioned, I believe that these proposals can be properly regarded as a
further development of classical rationalist doctrine, as an elaboration of some
of its main ideas regarding language and mind. Of course, such a theory will be
“repugnant” to one who accepts empiricist doctrine and regards it as immune
to question or challenge. It seems to me that this is the heart of the matter.
Putnam’s paper (see note 13) deals more directly with the points at issue,
but it seems to me that his arguments are also inconclusive, because of certain
incorrect assumptions that he makes about the nature of the acquired grammars.
Putnam assumes that on the level of phonetics the only property proposed in
universal grammar is that a language has “a short list of phonemes.” This, he
argues, is not a similarity among languages that requires elaborate explanatory
hypotheses. The conclusion is correct; the assumption is quite wrong. In fact, as I
have now pointed out several times, very strong empirical hypotheses have been
proposed regarding the specific choice of universal features, conditions on the
form and organization of phonological rules, conditions on rule application, and
so on. If these proposals are correct or near correct, then “similarities among
languages” at the level of sound structure are indeed remarkable and cannot
be accounted for simply by assumptions about memory capacity, as Putnam
suggests.
Above the level of sound structure, Putnam assumes that the only significant properties of language are that they have proper names, that the grammar
contains a phrase structure component, and that there are rules “abbreviating”
sentences generated by the phrase structure component. He argues that the
nature of the phrase structure component is determined by the existence of
proper names; that the existence of a phrase structure component is explained
by the fact that “all the natural measures of complexity of an algorithm – size
of the machine table, length of computations, time, and space required for
the computation – lead to the . . . result”; that phrase structure systems provide the “algorithms which are ‘simplest’ for virtually any computing system,”
hence also “for naturally evolved ‘computing systems’”; and that there is nothing surprising in the fact that languages contain rules of abbreviation.
Each of the three conclusions involves a false assumption. From the fact that a
phrase structure system contains proper names one can conclude almost nothing
about its other categories. In fact, there is much dispute at the moment about
the general properties of the underlying phrase structure system for natural
languages; the dispute is not in the least resolved by the existence of proper
names.

Linguistic contributions: future

75

As to the second point, it is simply untrue that all measures of complexity and
speed of computation lead to phrase structure rules as the “simplest possible
algorithm.” The only existing results that are even indirectly relevant show that
context-free phrase structure grammars (a reasonable model for rules generating deep structures, when we exclude the lexical items and the distributional
conditions they meet) receive an automata-theoretic interpretation as nondeterministic pushdown storage automata, but the latter is hardly a “natural” notion
from the point of view of “simplicity of algorithms” and so forth. In fact, it
can be argued that the somewhat similar but not formally related concept of
real-time deterministic automation is far more “natural” in terms of time and
space conditions on computation.16
However, it is pointless to pursue this topic, because what is at stake is not the
“simplicity” of phrase structure grammars but rather of transformational grammars with a phrase structure component that plays a role in generating deep
structures. And there is absolutely no mathematical concept of “ease of computation” or “simplicity of algorithm” that even vaguely suggests that such systems
may have some advantage over the kinds of automata that have been seriously
investigated from this point of view – for example, finite state automata, linear
bounded automata, and so on. The basic concept of “structure-dependent operation” has never even been considered in a strictly mathematical concept. The
source of this confusion is a misconception on Putnam’s part as to the nature of
grammatical transformations. They are not rules that “abbreviate” sentences;
rather, they are operations that form surface structures from underlying deep
structures, in such ways as are illustrated in the preceding lecture and the references there cited.17 Hence, to show that transformational grammars are the
“simplest possible,” one would have to demonstrate that the “optimal” computing system would take a string of symbols as input and determine its surface
structure, its underlying deep structure, and the sequence of transformational
operations that relates them. Nothing of the sort has been shown; in fact, the
question has never even been raised.
Putnam argues that even if significant uniformities among languages were
to be discovered, there would be a simpler explanation than the hypothesis of
an innate universal grammar, namely their common origin. But this proposal
16

17

For some discussion of these matters, see my “Formal Properties of Grammars,” in R. D. Luce,
R. Bush, and E. Galanter, eds., Handbook of Mathematical Psychology, Vol. II (New York:
Wiley, 1963). For a more extensive discussion of the automata-theoretic framework, see R. J.
Nelson, Introduction to Automata (New York: Wiley, 1968). A detailed presentation of properties
of context-free grammars is given in S. Ginsburg, The Mathematical Theory of Context-Free
Languages (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966). There have been a number of studies of speed of
computation, simplicity of algorithms, and so on, but none of them has any bearing on the issue
under discussion.
See note 10 of Lecture 2, p. 29, for further comment.

76

Language and Mind

involves a serious misunderstanding of the problem at issue. The grammar of
a language must be discovered by the child from the data presented to him. As
noted earlier, the empirical problem is to find a hypothesis about initial structure
rich enough to account for the fact that a specific grammar is constructed by
the child, but not so rich as to be falsified by the known diversity of language.
Questions of common origin are of potential relevance to this empirical issue
in only one respect: if the existing languages are not a “fair sample” of the
“possible languages,” we may be led mistakenly to propose too narrow a schema
for universal grammar. However, as I mentioned earlier, the empirical problem
that we face today is that no one has been able to devise an initial hypothesis rich
enough to account for the acquisition by the child of the grammar that we are,
apparently, led to attribute to him when we try to account for his ability to use
the language in the normal way. The assumption of common origin contributes
nothing to explaining how this achievement is possible. In short, the language
is “reinvented” each time it is learned, and the empirical problem to be faced
by the theory of learning is how this invention of grammar can take place.
Putnam does face this problem and suggests that there might be “general multipurpose learning strategies” that account for this achievement. It is, of course,
an empirical question whether the properties of the “language faculty” are specific to language or are merely a particular case of much more general mental
faculties (or learning strategies). This is a problem that has been discussed earlier in this lecture, inconclusively and in a slightly different context. Putnam
takes for granted that it is only general “learning strategies” that are innate but
suggests no grounds for this empirical assumption. As I have argued earlier,
a nondogmatic approach to this problem can be pursued, without reliance on
unargued assumptions of this sort – that is, through the investigation of specific areas of human competence, such as language, followed by the attempt to
devise a hypothesis that will account for the development of this competence. If
we discover through such investigation that the same “learning strategies” are
sufficient to account for the development of competence in various domains, we
will have reason to believe that Putnam’s assumption is correct. If we discover
that the postulated innate structures differ from case to case, the only rational
conclusion would be that a model of mind must involve separate “faculties,”
with unique or partially unique properties. I cannot see how anyone can resolutely insist on one or the other conclusion in the light of the evidence now
available to us. But one thing is quite clear: Putnam has no justification for
his final conclusion, that “invoking ‘Innateness’ only postpones the problem of
learning; it does not solve it.” Invoking an innate representation of universal
grammar does solve the problem of learning, if it is true that this is the basis for
language acquisition, as it well may be. If, on the other hand, there are general
learning strategies that account for the acquisition of grammatical knowledge,
then postulation of an innate universal grammar will not “postpone” the problem

Linguistic contributions: future

77

of learning, but will rather offer an incorrect solution to this problem. The issue
is an empirical one of truth or falsity, not a methodological one of states of
investigation.18
To summarize, it seems to me that neither Goodman nor Putnam offers a
serious counterargument to the proposals concerning innate mental structure
that have been advanced (tentatively, of course, as befits empirical hypotheses)
or suggests a plausible alternative approach, with empirical content, to the
problem of acquisition of knowledge.
Assuming the rough accuracy of conclusions that seem tenable today, it is
reasonable to suppose that a generative grammar is a system of many hundreds
of rules of several different types, organized in accordance with certain fixed
principles of ordering and applicability and containing a certain fixed substructure which, along with the general principles of organization, is common to all
languages. There is no a priori “naturalness” to such a system, any more than
there is to the detailed structure of the visual cortex. No one who has given any
serious thought to the problem of formalizing inductive procedures or “heuristic methods” is likely to set much store by the hope that such a system as a
generative grammar can be constructed by methods of any generality.
To my knowledge, the only substantive proposal to deal with the problem of
acquisition of knowledge of language is the rationalist conception that I have
outlined. To repeat: suppose that we assign to the mind, as an innate property,
the general theory of language that we have called “universal grammar.” This
theory encompasses the principles that I discussed in the preceding lecture and
many others of the same sort, and it specifies a certain subsystem of rules that
provides a skeletal structure for any language and a variety of conditions, formal
and substantive, that any further elaboration of the grammar must meet. The
theory of universal grammar, then, provides a schema to which any particular
grammar must conform. Suppose, furthermore, that we can make this schema
sufficiently restrictive so that very few possible grammars conforming to the
schema will be consistent with the meager and degenerate data actually available
to the language learner. His task, then, is to search among the possible grammars
and select one that is not definitely rejected by the data available to him. What
faces the language learner, under these assumptions, is not the impossible task
of inventing a highly abstract and intricately structured theory on the basis of
degenerate data, but rather the much more manageable task of determining
whether these data belong to one or another of a fairly restricted set of potential
languages.
18

It is surprising to see that Putnam refers disparagingly to “vague talk of ‘classes of hypotheses’ –
and ‘weighting functions’” in the course of his discussion of “general learning strategies.” For
the moment, the latter is a mere phrase without any describable content. On the other hand, there
is a substantial literature detailing the properties of the classes of hypotheses and weighting
functions to which Putnam refers. Hence, the shoe seems to be on the other foot in this case.

78

Language and Mind

The tasks of the psychologist, then, divide into several subtasks. The first
is to discover the innate schema that characterizes the class of potential languages – that defines the “essence” of human language. This subtask falls to
that branch of human psychology known as linguistics; it is the problem of
traditional universal grammar, of contemporary linguistic theory. The second
subtask is the detailed study of the actual character of the stimulation and the
organism–environment interaction that sets the innate cognitive mechanism into
operation. This is a study now being undertaken by a few psychologists, and it
is particularly active right here in Berkeley. It has already led to interesting and
suggestive conclusions. One might hope that such study will reveal a succession
of maturational stages leading finally to a full generative grammar.19
A third task is that of determining just what it means for a hypothesis about
the generative grammar of a language to be “consistent” with the data of sense.
Notice that it is a great oversimplification to suppose that a child must discover
a generative grammar that accounts for all the linguistic data that has been
presented to him and that “projects” such data to an infinite range of potential
sound–meaning relations. In addition to achieving this, he must also differentiate the data of sense into those utterances that give direct evidence as to the
character of the underlying grammar and those that must be rejected by the
hypothesis he selects as ill-formed, deviant, fragmentary, and so on. Clearly,
everyone succeeds in carrying out this task of differentiation – we all know,
within tolerable limits of consistency, which sentences are well formed and
literally interpretable, and which must be interpreted as metaphorical, fragmentary, and deviant along many possible dimensions. I doubt that it has been
fully appreciated to what extent this complicates the problem of accounting for
language acquisition. Formally speaking, the learner must select a hypothesis
regarding the language to which he is exposed that rejects a good part of the
data on which this hypothesis must rest. Again, it is reasonable to suppose this
is possible only if the range of tenable hypotheses is quite limited – if the innate
schema of universal grammar is highly restrictive. The third subtask, then, is to
study what we might think of as the problem of “confirmation” – in this context,
the problem of what relation must hold between a potential grammar and a set
19

It is not unlikely that detailed investigation of this sort will show that the conception of universal
grammar as an innate schematism is only valid as a first approximation; that, in fact, an innate
schematism of a more general sort permits the formulation of tentative “grammars” which
themselves determine how later evidence is to be interpreted, leading to the postulation of richer
grammars, and so on. I have so far been discussing language acquisition on the obviously false
assumption that it is an instantaneous process. There are many interesting questions that arise
when we consider how the process extends in time. For some discussion relating to problems of
phonology, see my paper “Phonology and Reading,” in H. Levin, ed., Basic Studies on Reading.
Notice also that it is unnecessary to suppose, even in the first approximation, that “very few
possible grammars conforming to the schema” will be available to the language learner. It is
enough to suppose that the possible grammars consistent with the data will be “scattered” in
terms of an evaluation procedure.

Linguistic contributions: future

79

of data for this grammar to be confirmed as the actual theory of the language
in question.
I have been describing the problem of acquisition of knowledge of language
in terms that are more familiar in an epistemological than a psychological
context, but I think that this is quite appropriate. Formally speaking, acquisition
of “common-sense knowledge” – knowledge of a language, for example – is
not unlike theory construction of the most abstract sort. Speculating about the
future development of the subject, it seems to me not unlikely, for the reasons I
have mentioned, that learning theory will progress by establishing the innately
determined set of possible hypotheses, determining the conditions of interaction
that lead the mind to put forth hypotheses from this set, and fixing the conditions
under which such a hypothesis is confirmed – and, perhaps, under which much
of the data is rejected as irrelevant for one reason or another.
Such a way of describing the situation should not be too surprising to those
familiar with the history of psychology at Berkeley, where, after all, Edward
Tolman has given his name to the psychology building; but I want to stress
that the hypotheses I am discussing are qualitatively different in complexity
and intricacy from anything that was considered in the classical discussions
of learning. As I have now emphasized several times, there seems to be little
useful analogy between the theory of grammar that a person has internalized and
that provides the basis for his normal, creative use of language, and any other
cognitive system that has so far been isolated and described; similarly, there is
little useful analogy between the schema of universal grammar that we must, I
believe, assign to the mind as an innate character, and any other known system
of mental organization. It is quite possible that the lack of analogy testifies to
our ignorance of other aspects of mental function, rather than to the absolute
uniqueness of linguistic structure; but the fact is that we have, for the moment,
no objective reason for supposing this to be true.
The way in which I have been describing acquisition of knowledge of language calls to mind a very interesting and rather neglected lecture given by
Charles Sanders Peirce more than fifty years ago, in which he developed some
rather similar notions about acquisition of knowledge in general.20 Peirce argued
that the general limits of human intelligence are much more narrow than might
be suggested by romantic assumptions about the limitless perfectibility of man
(or, for that matter, than are suggested by his own “pragmaticist” conceptions
of the course of scientific progress in his better-known philosophical studies).
He held that innate limitations on admissible hypotheses are a precondition for
successful theory construction, and that the “guessing instinct” that provides
hypotheses makes use of inductive procedures only for “corrective action.”
20

C. S. Peirce, “The Logic of Abduction,” in V. Tomas, ed., Peirce’s Essays in the Philosophy of
Science (New York: Liberal Arts Press, 1957).

80

Language and Mind

Peirce maintained in this lecture that the history of early science shows that
something approximating a correct theory was discovered with remarkable ease
and rapidity, on the basis of highly inadequate data, as soon as certain problems
were faced; he noted “how few were the guesses that men of surpassing genius
had to make before they rightly guessed the laws of nature.” And, he asked,
“How was it that man was ever led to entertain that true theory? You cannot say
that it happened by chance, because the chances are too overwhelmingly against
the single true theory in the twenty or thirty thousand years during which man
has been a thinking animal, ever having come into any man’s head.” A fortiori,
the chances are even more overwhelmingly against the true theory of each language ever having come into the head of every four-year-old child. Continuing
with Peirce: “Man’s mind has a natural adaptation to imagining correct theories
of some kinds . . . If man had not the gift of a mind adapted to his requirements,
he could not have acquired any knowledge.” Correspondingly, in our present
case, it seems that knowledge of a language – a grammar – can be acquired only
by an organism that is “preset” with a severe restriction on the form of grammar. This innate restriction is a precondition, in the Kantian sense, for linguistic
experience, and it appears to be the critical factor in determining the course and
result of language learning. The child cannot know at birth which language
he is to learn, but he must know that its grammar must be of a predetermined
form that excludes many imaginable languages. Having selected a permissible
hypothesis, he can use inductive evidence for corrective action, confirming or
disconfirming his choice. Once the hypothesis is sufficiently well confirmed,
the child knows the language defined by this hypothesis; consequently, his
knowledge extends enormously beyond his experience and, in fact, leads him
to characterize much of the data of experience as defective and deviant.
Peirce regarded inductive processes as rather marginal to the acquisition of
knowledge; in his words, “Induction has no originality in it, but only tests a
suggestion already made.” To understand how knowledge is acquired, in the
rationalist view that Peirce outlined, we must penetrate the mysteries of what he
called “abduction,” and we must discover that which “gives a rule to abduction
and so puts a limit upon admissible hypotheses.” Peirce maintained that the
search for principles of abduction leads us to the study of innate ideas, which
provide the instinctive structure of human intelligence. But Peirce was no dualist in the Cartesian sense; he argued (not very persuasively, in my opinion)
that there is a significant analogy between human intelligence, with its abductive restrictions, and animal instinct. Thus, he maintained that man discovered
certain true theories only because his “instincts must have involved from the
beginning certain tendencies to think truly” about certain specific matters; similarly, “You cannot seriously think that every little chicken that is hatched, has
to rummage through all possible theories until it lights upon the good idea of
picking up something and eating it. On the contrary, you think that the chicken

Linguistic contributions: future

81

has an innate idea of doing this; that is to say, that it can think of this, but has
no faculty of thinking anything else . . . But if you are going to think every poor
chicken endowed with an innate tendency towards a positive truth, why should
you think to man alone this gift is denied?”
No one took up Peirce’s challenge to develop a theory of abduction, to determine those principles that limit the admissible hypotheses or present them in a
certain order. Even today, this remains a task for the future. It is a task that need
not be undertaken if empiricist psychological doctrine can be substantiated;
therefore, it is of great importance to subject this doctrine to rational analysis,
as has been done, in part, in the study of language. I would like to repeat that
it was the great merit of structural linguistics, as of Hullian learning theory in
its early stages and of several other modern developments, to have given precise form to certain empiricist assumptions.21 Where this step has been taken,
the inadequacy of the postulated mechanisms has been clearly demonstrated,
and, in the case of language at least, we can even begin to see just why any
methods of this sort must fail – for example, because they cannot, in principle,
provide for the properties of deep structures and the abstract operations of formal grammar. Speculating about the future, I think it is not unlikely that the
dogmatic character of the general empiricist framework and its inadequacy to
21

In contrast, the account of language acquisition presented by B. F. Skinner in his Verbal Behavior
(New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1957) seems to me either devoid of content or clearly
wrong, depending on whether one interprets it metaphorically or literally (see my review of
this book in Language, Vol. 35, No. 1, 1959, pp. 26–58). It is quite appropriate when a theory
is disproven in a strong form to replace it by a weaker variant. However, not infrequently this
step leads to vacuity. The popularity of Skinner’s concept of “reinforcement,” after the virtual
collapse of Hullian theory, seems to me a case in point. (Note that the Skinnerian concepts can
be well defined and can lead to interesting results, in a particular experimental situation – what
is at issue is the Skinnerian “extrapolation” to a wider class of cases.)
Another example appears in K. Salzinger, “The Problem of Response Class in Verbal
Behavior,” in K. Salzinger and S. Salzinger, eds., Research in Verbal Behavior and Some Neurophysiological Implications (New York: Academic Press, 1967), pp. 35–54. Salzinger argues that
George Miller is not justified in criticizing learning theory for its inability to explain linguistic
productivity – that is, the ability of a speaker to determine, of a sequence of words that he has
never heard, whether or not it is a well-formed sentence and what it means. The defect can be
overcome, he argues, by making use of the notion of “response class.” True, it cannot be that
each response is reinforced, but the class of acceptable sentences constitutes a response class,
like the set of bar-presses in a particular Skinnerian experiment. Unfortunately, this is empty
verbiage until the condition that defines membership in this class is established. If the condition
involves the notion “generation by a given grammar,” then we are back where we started.
Salzinger also misconstrues the attempts to provide an experimental test that will distinguish
grammatical from ungrammatical strings. He states that such tests have failed to confirm such a
division and therefore concludes, apparently, that the distinction does not exist. Obviously, the
failure indicates nothing more than that the tests were ineffective. One can invent innumerable
tests that would fail to provide some given classification. Surely the classification itself is not
in question. Thus, Salzinger would agree, quite apart from any experimental test that might be
devised, that the sentences of this footnote share an important property that does not hold of the
set of strings of words formed by reading each of these sentences, word by word, from right to
left.

82

Language and Mind

human and animal intelligence will gradually become more evident as specific
realizations, such as taxonomic linguistics, behaviorist learning theory, and the
perception models,22 heuristic methods, and “general problem solvers” of the
early enthusiasts of “artificial intelligence,” are successively rejected on empirical grounds when they are made precise and on grounds of vacuity when they
are left vague. And – assuming this projection to be accurate – it will then be
possible to undertake a general study of the limits and capacities of human
intelligence, to develop a Peircean logic of abduction.
Modern psychology is not devoid of such initiatives. The contemporary study
of generative grammar and its universal substructure and governing principles
is one such manifestation. Closely related is the study of the biological bases of
human language, an investigation to which Eric Lenneberg has made substantial
contributions.23 It is tempting to see a parallel development in the very important
work of Piaget and others interested in “genetic epistemology,” but I am not
sure that this is accurate. It is not clear to me, for example, what Piaget takes to
be the basis for the transition from one of the stages that he discusses to the next,
higher stage. There is, furthermore, a possibility, suggested by recent work of
Mehler and Bever,24 that the deservedly well-known results on conservation, in
particular, may not demonstrate successive stages of intellectual development in
the sense discussed by Piaget and his coworkers, but something rather different.
If the preliminary results of Mehler and Bever are correct, then it would follow
that the “final stage,” in which conservation is properly understood, was already
realized at a very early period of development. Later, the child develops a
heuristic technique that is largely adequate but that fails under the conditions of
the conservation experiment. Still later, he adjusts this technique successfully
and once again makes the correct judgments in the conservation experiment.
If this analysis is correct, then what we are observing is not a succession of
stages of intellectual development, in Piaget’s sense, but rather slow progress
in bringing heuristic techniques into line with general concepts that have always
been present. These are interesting alternatives; either way, the results may bear
in important ways on the topics we are considering.
Still more clearly to the point, I think, are the developments in comparative
ethology over the past thirty years, and certain current work in experimental
and physiological psychology. One can cite many examples: for example, in the
22

23

24

For a discussion of such systems and their limitations, see M. Minsky and S. Papert, Perceptions
and Pattern Recognition, Artificial Intelligence Memo No. 140, MAC-M-358, Project MAC,
Cambridge, Mass., September 1967.
See E. H. Lenneberg, Biological Foundations of Language (New York: Wiley, 1967). My contribution to this volume, “The Formal Nature of Language,” appears as the fifth paper in this
book.
See J. Mehler and T. G. Bever, “Cognitive Capacities of Young Children,” Science, Vol. 158,
No. 3797, October 1967, pp. 141–42.

Linguistic contributions: future

83

latter category, the work of Bower suggesting an innate basis for the perceptual
constancies; studies in the Wisconsin primate laboratory on complex innate
releasing mechanisms in rhesus monkeys; the work of Hubel, Barlow, and
others on highly specific analyzing mechanisms in the lower cortical centers
of mammals; and a number of comparable studies of lower organisms (for
example, the beautiful work of Lettvin and his associates on frog vision). There
is now good evidence from such investigations that perception of line, angle,
motion, and other complex properties of the physical world is based on innate
organization of the neural system.
In some cases at least, these built-in structures will degenerate unless appropriate stimulation takes place at an early stage in life, but although such experience is necessary to permit the innate mechanisms to function, there is no
reason to believe that it has more than a marginal effect on determining how
they function to organize experience. Furthermore, there is nothing to suggest
that what has so far been discovered is anywhere near the limit of complexity
of innate structures. The basic techniques for exploring the neural mechanisms
are only a few years old, and it is impossible to predict what order of specificity and complexity will be demonstrated when they come to be extensively
applied. For the present, it seems that most complex organisms have highly
specific forms of sensory and perceptual organization that are associated with
the Umwelt and the manner of life of the organism. There is little reason to
doubt that what is true of lower organisms is true of humans as well. Particularly in the case of language, it is natural to expect a close relation between
innate properties of the mind and features of linguistic structure; for language,
after all, has no existence apart from its mental representation. Whatever properties it has must be those that are given to it by the innate mental processes
of the organism that has invented it and that invents it anew with each succeeding generation, along with whatever properties are associated with the
conditions of its use. Once again, it seems that language should be, for this reason, a most illuminating probe with which to explore the organization of mental
processes.
Turning to comparative ethology, it is interesting to note that one of its
earliest motivations was the hope that through the “investigation of the a priori,
of the innate working hypotheses present in subhuman organisms,” it would be
possible to shed light on the a priori forms of human thought. This formulation
of intent is quoted from an early and little-known paper by Konrad Lorenz.25
Lorenz goes on to express views very much like those Peirce had expressed a
generation earlier. He maintains:
25

K. Lorenz, “Kants Lehre vom apriorischen in Lichte gegenwärtiger Biologie,” in Blätter für
Deutsche Philosophie, Vol. 15, 1941, pp. 94–125. I am indebted to Donald Walker of the MITRE
Corporation, Bedford, Mass., for bringing this paper to my attention.

84

Language and Mind

One familiar with the innate modes of reaction of subhuman organisms can readily hypothesize that the a priori is due to hereditary differentiations of the central
nervous system which have become characteristic of the species, producing hereditary dispositions to think in certain forms . . . Most certainly Hume was wrong when he
wanted to derive all that is a priori from that which the senses supply to experience, just
as wrong as Wundt or Helmholtz who simply explain it as an abstraction from preceding
experience. Adaptation of the a priori to the real world has no more originated from
“experience” than adaptation of the fin of the fish to the properties of water. Just as the
form of the fin is given a priori, prior to any individual negotiation of the young fish
with the water, and just as it is this form that makes possible this negotiation, so it is
also the case with our forms of perception and categories in their relationship to our
negotiation with the real external world through experience. In the case of animals, we
find limitations specific to the forms of experience possible for them. We believe we
can demonstrate the closest functional and probably genetic relationship between these
animal a prioris and our human a priori. Contrary to Hume, we believe, just as did Kant,
that a “pure” science of innate forms of human thought, independent of all experience,
is possible.

Peirce, to my knowledge, is original and unique in stressing the problem of
studying the rules that limit the class of possible theories. Of course, his concept
of abduction, like Lorenz’s biological a priori, has a strongly Kantian flavor, and
all derive from the rationalist psychology that concerned itself with the forms,
the limits, and the principles that provide “the sinews and connections” for
human thought, that underlie “that infinite amount of knowledge of which we
are not always conscious,” of which Leibnitz spoke. It is therefore quite natural
that we should link these developments to the revival of philosophical grammar,
which grew from the same soil as an attempt, quite fruitful and legitimate, to
explore one basic facet of human intelligence.
In recent discussion, models and observations derived from ethology have
frequently been cited as providing biological support, or at least analogue, to
new approaches to the study of human intelligence. I cite these comments of
Lorenz’s mainly in order to show that this reference does not distort the outlook
of at least some of the founders of this domain of comparative psychology.
One word of caution is necessary in referring to Lorenz, now that he has
been discovered by Robert Ardrey and Joseph Alsop and popularized as a
prophet of doom. It seems to me that Lorenz’s views on human aggression
have been extended to near absurdity by some of his expositors. It is no doubt
true that there are innate tendencies in the human psychic constitution that
lead to aggressiveness under specific social and cultural conditions. But there
is little reason to suppose that these tendencies are so dominant as to leave
us forever tottering on the brink of a Hobbesian war of all against all – as,
incidentally, Lorenz at least is fully aware, if I read him rightly. Skepticism is
certainly in order when a doctrine of man’s “inherent aggressiveness” comes to
the surface in a society that glorifies competitiveness, in a civilization that has

Linguistic contributions: future

85

been distinguished by the brutality of the attack that it has mounted against less
fortunate peoples. It is fair to ask to what extent the enthusiasm for this curious
view of man’s nature is attributable to fact and logic and to what extent it merely
reflects the limited extent to which the general cultural level has advanced since
the days when Clive and the Portuguese explorers taught the meaning of true
savagery to the inferior races that stood in their way.
In any event, I would not want what I am saying to be confused with other,
entirely different attempts to revive a theory of human instinct. What seems
to me important in ethology is its attempt to explore the innate properties that
determine how knowledge is acquired and the character of this knowledge.
Returning to this theme, we must consider a further question: how did the
human mind come to acquire the innate structure that we are led to attribute to
it? Not too surprisingly, Lorenz takes the position that this is simply a matter
of natural selection. Peirce offers a rather different speculation, arguing that
“nature fecundates the mind of man with ideas which, when these ideas grow
up, will resemble their father, Nature.” Man is “provided with certain natural
beliefs that are true” because “certain uniformities . . . prevail throughout the
universe, and the reasoning mind is [it]self a product of this universe. These
same laws are thus, by logical necessity, incorporated in his own being.” Here, it
seems clear that Peirce’s argument is entirely without force and that it offers little
improvement over the preestablished harmony that it was presumably intended
to replace. The fact that the mind is a product of natural laws does not imply
that it is equipped to understand these laws or to arrive at them by “abduction.”
There would be no difficulty in designing a device (say, programing a computer)
that is a product of natural law, but that, given data, will arrive at any arbitrary
absurd theory to “explain” these data.
In fact, the processes by which the human mind achieved its present stage of
complexity and its particular form of innate organization are a total mystery, as
much so as the analogous questions about the physical or mental organization
of any other complex organism. It is perfectly safe to attribute this development to “natural selection,” so long as we realize that there is no substance to
this assertion, that it amounts to nothing more than a belief that there is some
naturalistic explanation for these phenomena. The problem of accounting for
evolutionary development is, in some ways, rather like that of explaining successful abduction. The laws that determine possible successful mutation and
the nature of complex organisms are as unknown as the laws that determine
the choice of hypotheses.26 With no knowledge of the laws that determine the
26

It has been argued on statistical grounds – through comparison of the known rate of mutation
with the astronomical number of imaginable modifications of chromosomes and their parts – that
such laws must exist and must vastly restrict the realizable possibilities. See the papers by Eden,
Schützenberger, and Gavadan in Mathematical Challenges to the Neo-Darwinian Interpretation
of Evolution, Wistar Symposium Monograph No. 5, 1967.

86

Language and Mind

organization and structure of complex biological systems, it is just as senseless
to ask what the “probability” is for the human mind to have reached its present
state as it is to inquire into the “probability” that a particular physical theory will
be devised. And, as we have noted, it is idle to speculate about laws of learning
until we have some indication of what kind of knowledge is attainable – in
the case of language, some indication of the constraints on the set of potential
grammars.
In studying the evolution of mind, we cannot guess to what extent there are
physically possible alternatives to, say, transformational generative grammar,
for an organism meeting certain other physical conditions characteristic of
humans. Conceivably, there are none – or very few – in which case talk about
evolution of the language capacity is beside the point. The vacuity of such
speculation, however, has no bearing one way or another on those aspects of
the problem of mind that can be sensibly pursued. It seems to me that these
aspects are, for the moment, the problems illustrated in the case of language by
the study of the nature, the use, and the acquisition of linguistic competence.
There is one final issue that deserves a word of comment. I have been using
mentalistic terminology quite freely, but entirely without prejudice as to the
question of what may be the physical realization of the abstract mechanisms
postulated to account for the phenomena of behavior or the acquisition of knowledge. We are not constrained, as was Descartes, to postulate a second substance
when we deal with phenomena that are not expressible in terms of matter in
motion, in his sense. Nor is there much point in pursuing the question of psychophysical parallelism, in this connection. It is an interesting question whether
the functioning and evolution of human mentality can be accommodated within
the framework of physical explanation, as presently conceived, or whether there
are new principles, now unknown, that must be invoked, perhaps principles that
emerge only at higher levels of organization than can now be submitted to physical investigation. We can, however, be fairly sure that there will be a physical
explanation for the phenomena in question, if they can be explained at all, for
an uninteresting terminological reason, namely that the concept of “physical
explanation” will no doubt be extended to incorporate whatever is discovered
in this domain, exactly as it was extended to accommodate gravitational and
electromagnetic force, massless particles, and numerous other entities and processes that would have offended the common sense of earlier generations. But
it seems clear that this issue need not delay the study of the topics that are now
open to investigation, and it seems futile to speculate about matters so remote
from present understanding.
I have tried to suggest that the study of language may very well, as was traditionally supposed, provide a remarkably favorable perspective for the study
of human mental processes. The creative aspect of language use, when investigated with care and respect for the facts, shows that current notions of habit

Linguistic contributions: future

87

and generalization, as determinants of behavior or knowledge, are quite inadequate. The abstractness of linguistic structure reinforces this conclusion, and it
suggests further that in both perception and learning the mind plays an active
role in determining the character of the acquired knowledge. The empirical
study of linguistic universals has led to the formulation of highly restrictive
and, I believe, quite plausible hypotheses concerning the possible variety of
human languages, hypotheses that contribute to the attempt to develop a theory
of acquisition of knowledge that gives due place to intrinsic mental activity. It
seems to me, then, that the study of language should occupy a central place in
general psychology.
Surely the classical questions of language and mind receive no final solution,
or even the hint of a final solution, from the work that is being actively pursued
today. Nevertheless, these problems can be formulated in new ways and seen
in a new light. For the first time in many years, it seems to me, there is some
real opportunity for substantial progress in the study of the contribution of the
mind to perception and the innate basis for acquisition of knowledge. Still, in
many respects, we have not made the first approach to a real answer to the
classical problems. For example, the central problems relating to the creative
aspect of language use remain as inaccessible as they have always been. And
the study of universal semantics, surely crucial to the full investigation of language structure, has barely advanced since the medieval period. Many other
critical areas might be mentioned where progress has been slow or nonexistent. Real progress has been made in the study of the mechanisms of language,
the formal principles that make possible the creative aspect of language use
and that determine the phonetic form and semantic content of utterances. Our
understanding of these mechanisms, though only fragmentary, does seem to me
to have real implications for the study of human psychology. By pursuing the
kinds of research that now seem feasible and by focusing attention on certain
problems that are now accessible to study, we may be able to spell out in some
detail the elaborate and abstract computations that determine, in part, the nature
of percepts and the character of the knowledge that we can acquire – the highly
specific ways of interpreting phenomena that are, in large measure, beyond our
consciousness and control and that may be unique to man.

4

Form and meaning in natural languages

When we study human language, we are approaching what some might call
the “human essence,” the distinctive qualities of mind that are, so far as we
know, unique to man and that are inseparable from any critical phase of human
existence, personal or social. Hence the fascination of this study, and, no less,
its frustration. The frustration arises from the fact that despite much progress,
we remain as incapable as ever before of coming to grips with the core problem
of human language, which I take to be this: having mastered a language, one
is able to understand an indefinite number of expressions that are new to one’s
experience, that bear no simple physical resemblance and are in no simple way
analogous to the expressions that constitute one’s linguistic experience; and one
is able, with greater or less facility, to produce such expressions on an appropriate occasion, despite their novelty and independently of detectable stimulus
configurations, and to be understood by others who share this still mysterious
ability. The normal use of language is, in this sense, a creative activity. This creative aspect of normal language use is one fundamental factor that distinguishes
human language from any known system of animal communication.
It is important to bear in mind that the creation of linguistic expressions that
are novel but appropriate is the normal mode of language use. If some individual
were to restrict himself largely to a definite set of linguistic patterns, to a set of
habitual responses to stimulus configurations, or to “analogies” in the sense of
modern linguistics, we would regard him as mentally defective, as being less
human than animal. He would immediately be set apart from normal humans by
his inability to understand normal discourse, or to take part in it in the normal
way – the normal way being innovative, free from control by external stimuli,
and appropriate to new and ever changing situations.
It is not a novel insight that human speech is distinguished by these qualities, though it is an insight that must be recaptured time and time again. With
each advance in our understanding of the mechanisms of language, thought, and
behavior, comes a tendency to believe that we have found the key to understanding man’s apparently unique qualities of mind. These advances are real, but an
honest appraisal will show, I think, that they are far from providing such a key.
We do not understand, and, for all we know, we may never come to understand
88

Form and meaning in natural languages

89

what makes it possible for a normal human intelligence to use language as an
instrument for the free expression of thought and feeling; or, for that matter,
what qualities of mind are involved in the creative acts of intelligence that are
characteristic, not unique and exceptional, in a truly human existence.
I think that this is an important fact to stress, not only for linguists and psychologists whose research centers on these issues, but, even more, for those who
hope to learn something useful in their own work and thinking from research
into language and thought. It is particularly important that the limitations of
understanding be clear to those involved in teaching, in the universities, and
even more important, in the schools. There are strong pressures to make use
of new educational technology and to design curriculum and teaching methods
in the light of the latest scientific advances. In itself, this is not objectionable.
It is important, nevertheless, to remain alert to a very real danger: that new
knowledge and technique will define the nature of what is taught and how it
is taught, rather than contribute to the realization of educational goals that are
set on other grounds and in other terms. Let me be concrete. Technique and
even technology is available for rapid and efficient inculcation of skilled behavior, in language teaching, teaching of arithmetic, and other domains. There is,
consequently, a real temptation to reconstruct curriculum in the terms defined
by the new technology. And it is not too difficult to invent a rationale, making use of the concepts of “controlling behavior,” enhancing skills, and so on.
Nor is it difficult to construct objective tests that are sure to demonstrate the
effectiveness of such methods in reaching certain goals that are incorporated
in these tests. But successes of this sort will not demonstrate that an important educational goal has been achieved. They will not demonstrate that it is
important to concentrate on developing skilled behavior in the student. What
little we know about human intelligence would at least suggest something quite
different: that by diminishing the range and complexity of materials presented
to the inquiring mind, by setting behavior in fixed patterns, these methods may
harm and distort the normal development of creative abilities. I do not want
to dwell on the matter. I am sure that any of you will be able to find examples from your own experience. It is perfectly proper to try to exploit genuine
advances in knowledge, and within some given field of study, it is inevitable,
and quite proper, that research should be directed by considerations of feasibility as well as considerations of ultimate significance. It is also highly likely,
if not inevitable, that considerations of feasibility and significance will lead in
divergent paths. For those who wish to apply the achievements of one discipline
to the problems of another, it is important to make very clear the exact nature
not only of what has been achieved, but equally important, the limitations of
what has been achieved.
I mentioned a moment ago that the creative aspect of normal use of language
is not a new discovery. It provides one important pillar for Descartes’ theory

90

Language and Mind

of mind, for his study of the limits of mechanical explanation. The latter, in
turn, provides one crucial element in the construction of the anti-authoritarian
social and political philosophy of the Enlightenment. And, in fact, there were
even some efforts to found a theory of artistic creativity on the creative aspect
of normal language use. Schlegel, for example, argues that poetry has a unique
position among the arts, a fact illustrated, he claims, by the use of the term
“poetical” to refer to the element of creative imagination in any artistic effort,
as distinct, say, from the term “musical,” which would be used metaphorically
to refer to a sensual element. To explain this asymmetry, he observes that every
mode of artistic expression makes use of a certain medium and that the medium
of poetry – language – is unique in that language, as an expression of the human
mind rather than a product of nature, is boundless in scope and is constructed
on the basis of a recursive principle that permits each creation to serve as the
basis for a new creative act. Hence the central position among the arts of the
art forms whose medium is language.
The belief that language, with its inherent creative aspect, is a unique human
possession did not go unchallenged, of course. One expositor of Cartesian
philosophy, Antoine Le Grand, refers to the opinion “of some people of the East
Indies, who think that Apes and Baboons, which are with them in great numbers,
are imbued with understanding, and that they can speak but will not for fear they
should be employed, and set to work.” If there is a more serious argument in
support of the claim that human language capacity is shared with other primates,
then I am unaware of it. In fact, whatever evidence we do have seems to me
to support the view that the ability to acquire and use language is a speciesspecific human capacity, that there are very deep and restrictive principles that
determine the nature of human language and are rooted in the specific character
of the human mind. Obviously arguments bearing on this hypothesis cannot
be definitive or conclusive, but it appears to me, nevertheless, that even in the
present stage of our knowledge, the evidence is not inconsiderable.
There are any number of questions that might lead one to undertake a study
of language. Personally, I am primarily intrigued by the possibility of learning something, from the study of language, that will bring to light inherent
properties of the human mind. We cannot now say anything particularly informative about the normal creative use of language in itself. But I think that
we are slowly coming to understand the mechanisms that make possible this
creative use of language, the use of language as an instrument of free thought
and expression. Speaking again from a personal point of view, to me the most
interesting aspects of contemporary work in grammar are the attempts to formulate principles of organization of language which, it is proposed, are universal
reflections of properties of mind; and the attempt to show that on this assumption, certain facts about particular languages can be explained. Viewed in this
way, linguistics is simply a part of human psychology: the field that seeks to

Form and meaning in natural languages

91

determine the nature of human mental capacities and to study how these capacities are put to work. Many psychologists would reject a characterization of their
discipline in these terms, but this reaction seems to me to indicate a serious inadequacy in their conception of psychology, rather than a defect in the formulation
itself. In any event, it seems to me that these are proper terms in which to set
the goals of contemporary linguistics, and to discuss its achievements and its
failings.
I think it is now possible to make some fairly definite proposals about the
organization of human language and to put them to empirical test. The theory
of transformational-generative grammar, as it is evolving along diverse and
sometimes conflicting paths, has put forth such proposals; and there has been,
in the past few years, some very productive and suggestive work that attempts
to refine and reconstruct these formulations of the processes and structures that
underlie human language.
The theory of grammar is concerned with the question, What is the nature of
a person’s knowledge of his language, the knowledge that enables him to make
use of language in the normal, creative fashion? A person who knows a language
has mastered a system of rules that assigns sound and meaning in a definite way
for an infinite class of possible sentences. Each language thus consists (in part)
of a certain pairing of sound and meaning over an infinite domain. Of course,
the person who knows the language has no consciousness of having mastered
these rules or of putting them to use, nor is there any reason to suppose that this
knowledge of the rules of language can be brought to consciousness. Through
introspection, a person may accumulate various kinds of evidence about the
sound–meaning relation determined by the rules of the language that he has
mastered; there is no reason to suppose that he can go much beyond this surface
level of data so as to discover, through introspection, the underlying rules and
principles that determine the relation of sound and meaning. Rather, to discover
these rules and principles is a typical problem of science. We have a collection
of data regarding sound–meaning correspondence, the form and interpretation
of linguistic expressions, in various languages. We try to determine, for each
language, a system of rules that will account for such data. More deeply, we try
to establish the principles that govern the formation of such systems of rules
for any human language.
The system of rules that specifies the sound–meaning relation for a given
language can be called the “grammar” – or, to use a more technical term, the
“generative grammar” – of this language. To say that a grammar “generates”
a certain set of structures is simply to say that it specifies this set in a precise
way. In this sense, we may say that the grammar of a language generates an
infinite set of “structural descriptions,” each structural description being an
abstract object of some sort that determines a particular sound, a particular
meaning, and whatever formal properties and configurations serve to mediate

92

Language and Mind

the relation between sound and meaning. For example, the grammar of English
generates structural descriptions for the sentences I am now speaking; or, to
take a simpler case for purposes of illustration, the grammar of English would
generate a structural description for each of these sentences:
1
2

John is certain that Bill will leave.
John is certain to leave.

Each of us has mastered and internally represented a system of grammar that
assigns structural descriptions to these sentences; we use this knowledge, totally
without awareness or even the possibility of awareness, in producing these sentences or understanding them when they are produced by others. The structural
descriptions include a phonetic representation of the sentences and a specification of their meaning. In the case of the cited examples 1 and 2, the structural
descriptions must convey roughly the following information: they must indicate that in the case of 1, a given psychological state (namely, being certain that
Bill will leave) is attributed to John; whereas in the case of 2, a given logical
property (namely, the property of being certain) is attributed to the proposition
that John will leave. Despite the superficial similarity of form of these two sentences, the structural descriptions generated by the grammar must indicate that
their meanings are very different: one attributes a psychological state to John,
the other attributes a logical property to an abstract proposition. The second
sentence might be paraphrased in a very different form:
3

That John will leave is certain.

For the first there is no such paraphrase. In the paraphrase 3 the “logical form”
of 2 is expressed more directly, one might say. The grammatical relations in 2
and 3 are very similar, despite the difference of surface form; the grammatical
relations in 1 and 2 are very different, despite the similarity of surface form. Such
facts as these provide the starting point for an investigation of the grammatical
structure of English – and more generally, for the investigation of the general
properties of human language.
To carry the discussion of properties of language further, let me introduce the
term “surface structure” to refer to a representation of the phrases that constitute a linguistic expression and the categories to which these phrases belong. In
sentence 1, the phrases of the surface structure include: “that Bill will leave,”
which is a full proposition; the noun phrases “Bill” and “John”; the verb phrases
“will leave” and “is certain that Bill will leave,” and so on. In sentence 2,
the surface structure includes the verb phrases “to leave” and “is certain to
leave”; but the surface structure of 2 includes no proposition of the form “John
will leave,” even though this proposition expresses part of the meaning of
“John is certain to leave,” and appears as a phrase in the surface structure

Form and meaning in natural languages

93

of its paraphrase, “that John will leave is certain.” In this sense, surface
structure does not necessarily provide an accurate indication of the structures and relations that determine the meaning of a sentence; in the case of
sentence 2, “John is certain to leave,” the surface structure fails to indicate
that the proposition “John will leave” expresses a part of the meaning of
the sentence – although in the other two examples that I gave the surface structure comes rather close to indicating the semantically significant relations.
Continuing, let me introduce the further technical term “deep structure” to
refer to a representation of the phrases that play a more central role in the
semantic interpretation of a sentence. In the case of 1 and 3, the deep structure
might not be very different from the surface structure. In the case of 2, the deep
structure will be very different from the surface structure, in that it will include
some such proposition as “John will leave” and the predicate “is certain” applied
to this proposition, though nothing of the sort appears in the surface structure.
In general, apart from the simplest examples, the surface structures of sentences
are very different from their deep structures.
The grammar of English will generate, for each sentence, a deep structure, and
will contain rules showing how this deep structure is related to a surface structure. The rules expressing the relation of deep and surface structure are called
“grammatical transformations.” Hence the term “transformational-generative
grammar.” In addition to rules defining deep structures, surface structures, and
the relation between them, the grammar of English contains further rules that
relate these “syntactic objects” (namely, paired deep and surface structures) to
phonetic representations on the one hand, and to representations of meaning
on the other. A person who has acquired knowledge of English has internalized these rules and makes use of them when he understands or produces the
sentences just given as examples, and an indefinite range of others.
Evidence in support of this approach is provided by the observation that
interesting properties of English sentences can be explained directly in terms
of the deep structures assigned to them. Thus consider once again the two
sentences 1 (“John is certain that Bill will leave”) and 2 (“John is certain
to leave”). Recall that in the case of the first, the deep structure and surface
structure are virtually identical, whereas in the case of the second, they are very
different. Observe also that in the case of the first, there is a corresponding
nominal phrase, namely, “John’s certainty that Bill will leave (surprised me)”;
but in the case of the second, there is no corresponding nominal phrase. We
cannot say “John’s certainty to leave surprised me.” The latter nominal phrase
is intelligible, I suppose, but it is not well formed in English. The speaker of
English can easily make himself aware of this fact, though the reason for it will
very likely escape him. This fact is a special case of a very general property of
English: namely, nominal phrases exist corresponding to sentences that are very
close in surface form to deep structure, but not corresponding to such sentences

94

Language and Mind

that are remote in surface form from deep structure. Thus “John is certain that
Bill will leave,” being close in surface form to its deep structure, corresponds
to the nominal phrase “John’s certainty that Bill will leave”; but there is no
such phrase as “John’s certainty to leave” corresponding to “John is certain to
leave,” which is remote from its deep structure.
The notions of “closeness” and “remoteness” can be made quite precise.
When we have made them precise, we have an explanation for the fact that
nominalizations exist in certain cases but not in others – though were they to
exist in these other cases, they would often be perfectly intelligible. The explanation turns on the notion of deep structure: in effect, it states that nominalizations must reflect the properties of deep structure. There are many examples
that illustrate this phenomenon. What is important is the evidence it provides
in support of the view that deep structures which are often quite abstract exist
and play a central role in the grammatical processes that we use in producing and interpreting sentences. Such facts, then, support the hypothesis that
deep structures of the sort postulated in transformational-generative grammar
are real mental structures. These deep structures, along with the transformation rules that relate them to surface structure and the rules relating deep and
surface structures to representations of sound and meaning, are the rules that
have been mastered by the person who has learned a language. They constitute his knowledge of the language; they are put to use when he speaks and
understands.
The examples I have given so far illustrate the role of deep structure in determining meaning, and show that even in very simple cases, the deep structure
may be remote from the surface form. There is a great deal of evidence indicating that the phonetic form of a sentence is determined by its surface structure,
by principles of an extremely interesting and intricate sort that I will not try
to discuss here. From such evidence it is fair to conclude that surface structure determines phonetic form, and that the grammatical relations represented
in deep structure are those that determine meaning. Furthermore, as already
noted, there are certain grammatical processes, such as the process of nominalization, that can be stated only in terms of abstract deep structures.
The situation is complicated, however, by the fact that surface structure also
plays a role in determining semantic interpretation.1 The study of this question
is one of the most controversial aspects of current work, and, in my opinion,
likely to be one of the most fruitful. As an illustration, consider some of the
properties of the present perfect aspect in English – for example, such sentences
as “John has lived in Princeton.” An interesting and rarely noted feature of this
1

I discuss this matter in some detail in “Deep Structure and Semantic Interpretation,” in
R. Jakobson and S. Kawamoto, eds., Studies in General and Oriental Linguistics, commemorative volume for Shiro Hattori, TEC Corporation for Language and Educational Research,
Tokyo, 1970.

Form and meaning in natural languages

95

aspect is that in such cases it carries the presupposition that the subject is alive.
Thus it is proper for me to say “I have lived in Princeton” but, knowing that
Einstein is dead, I would not say “Einstein has lived in Princeton.” Rather, I
would say “Einstein lived in Princeton.” (As always, there are complications,
but this is accurate as a first approximation.) But now consider active and passive
forms with present perfect aspect. Knowing that John is dead and Bill alive, I
can say “Bill has often been visited by John, but not “John has often visited
Bill”; rather, “John often visited Bill.” I can say “I have been taught physics by
Einstein” but not “Einstein has taught me physics”; rather, “Einstein taught me
physics.” In general, active and passive are synonymous and have essentially the
same deep structures. But in these cases, active and passive forms differ in the
presuppositions they express; put simply, the presupposition is that the person
denoted by the surface subject is alive. In this respect, the surface structure
contributes to the meaning of the sentence in that it is relevant to determining
what is presupposed in the use of a sentence.
Carrying the matter further, observe that the situation is different when we
have a conjoined subject. Thus given that Hilary is alive and Marco Polo dead,
it is proper to say “Hilary has climbed Mt. Everest” but not “Marco Polo has
climbed Mt. Everest”; rather, again, “Marco Polo climbed Mt. Everest.” (Again,
I overlook certain subtleties and complications.) But now consider the sentence
“Marco Polo and Hilary (among others) have climbed Mt. Everest.” In this case,
there is no expressed presupposition that Marco Polo is alive, as there is none
in the passive “Mt. Everest has been climbed by Marco Polo (among others).”
Notice further that the situation changes considerably when we shift from
the normal intonation, as in the cases I have just given, to an intonation contour
that contains a contrastive or expressive stress. The effect of such intonation
on presupposition is fairly complex. Let me illustrate with a simple case. Consider the sentence “The Yankees played the Red Sox in Boston.” With normal
intonation, the point of main stress and highest pitch is the word “Boston” and
the sentence might be an answer to such questions as “where did the Yankees
play the Red Sox?” (“in Boston”); “what did the Yankees do?” (“they played
the Red Sox in Boston”); “what happened?” (“the Yankees played the Red Sox
in Boston”). But suppose that contrastive stress is placed on “Red Sox,” so that
we have “The Yankees played the red sox in Boston.” Now, the sentence can
be the answer only to “Who did the Yankees play in Boston?” Note that the
sentence presupposes that the Yankees played someone in Boston; if there was
no game at all, it is improper, not just false, to say “The Yankees played the
red sox in Boston.” In contrast, if there was no game at all, it is false, but not
improper, to say “The Yankees played the Red Sox in Boston,” with normal
intonation. Thus contrastive stress carries a presupposition in a sense in which
normal intonation does not, though normal intonation also carries a presupposition in another sense; thus it would be improper to answer the question “Who

96

Language and Mind

played the Red Sox in Boston?” with “The Yankees played the Red Sox in
Boston” (normal intonation). The same property of contrastive stress is shown
by the so-called cleft sentence construction. Thus the sentence “It was the
yankees who played the Red Sox in Boston” has primary stress on “Yankees,”
and presupposes that someone played the Red Sox in Boston. The sentence is
improper, not just false, if there was no game at all. These phenomena have
generally been overlooked when the semantic role of contrastive stress has been
noted.
To further illustrate the role of surface structure in determining meaning,
consider such sentences as this: “John is tall for a pygmy.” This sentence presupposes that John is a pygmy, and that pygmies tend to be short; hence given
our knowledge of the Watusi, it would be anomalous to say “John is tall for a
Watusi.” On the other hand, consider what happens when we insert the word
“even” in the sentence. Inserting it before “John” we derive: “Even John is tall
for a pygmy.” Again, the presupposition is that John is a pygmy and that pygmies are short. But consider: “John is tall even for a pygmy.” This presupposes
that pygmies are tall; it is therefore a strange sentence, given our knowledge of
the facts, as compared, say, to “John is tall even for a Watusi,” which is quite
all right. The point is that the position of “even” in the sentence “John is tall
for a pygmy” determines the presupposition with respect to the average height
of pygmies.
But the placement of the word “even” is a matter of surface structure. We can
see this from the fact that the word “even” can appear in association with phrases
that do not have any representation at the level of deep structure: Consider, for
example, the sentence “John isn’t certain to leave at 10; in fact, he isn’t even
certain to leave at all.” Here, the word “even” is associated with “certain to
leave,” a phrase which, as noted earlier, does not appear at the level of deep
structure. Hence in this case as well properties of surface structure play a role
in determining what is presupposed by a certain sentence.
The role of surface structure in determining meaning is illustrated once again
by the phenomenon of pronominalization.2 Thus if I say “Each of the men hates
his brothers,” the word “his” may refer to one of the men; but if I say “The men
each hate his brothers,” the word “his” must refer to some other person, not
otherwise referred to in the sentence. However, the evidence is strong that “each
of the men” and “the men each” derive from the same deep structure. Similarly,
it has been noted that placement of stress plays an important role in determining
pronominal reference. Consider the following discourse: “John washed the car;
I was afraid someone else would do it.” The sentence implies that I hoped
2

The examples that follow are due to Ray Dougherty, Adrian Akmajian, and Ray Jackendoff. See
my article in Jakobson and Kawamoto, eds., Studies in General and Oriental Linguistics, for
references.

Form and meaning in natural languages

97

that John would wash the car, and I’m happy that he did. But now consider the
following: “John washed the car; I was afraid someone else would do it.” With
stress on “afraid,” the sentence implies that I hoped that John would not wash
the car. The reference of “someone else” is different in the two cases. There are
many other examples that illustrate the role of surface structure in determining
pronominal reference.
To complicate matters still further, deep structure too plays a role in determining pronominal reference. Thus consider the sentence “John appeared to Bill
to like him.” Here, the pronoun “him” may refer to Bill but not John. Compare
“John appealed to Bill to like him.” Here, the pronoun may refer to John but
not Bill. Thus we can say “John appealed to Mary to like him,” but not “John
appeared to Mary to like him,” where “him” refers to “John”; on the other hand,
we can say “John appeared to Mary to like her,” but not “John appealed to Mary
to like her,” where “her” refers to Mary. Similarly, in “John appealed to Bill
to like himself,” the reflexive refers to Bill; but in “John appeared to Bill to
like himself,” it refers to John. These sentences are approximately the same
in surface structure; it is the differences in deep structure that determine the
pronominal reference.
Hence pronominal reference depends on both deep and surface structure. A
person who knows English has mastered a system of rules which make use of
properties of deep and surface structure in determining pronominal reference.
Again, he cannot discover these rules by introspection. In fact, these rules are
still unknown, though some of their properties are clear.
To summarize: the generative grammar of a language specifies an infinite
set of structural descriptions, each of which contains a deep structure, a surface structure, a phonetic representation, a semantic representation, and other
formal structures. The rules relating deep and surface structure – the so-called
“grammatical transformations” – have been investigated in some detail, and
are fairly well understood. The rules that relate surface structure and phonetic
representation are also reasonably well understood (though I do not want to
imply that the matter is beyond dispute: far from it). It seems that both deep
and surface structure enter into the determination of meaning. Deep structure
provides the grammatical relations of predication, modification, and so on, that
enter into the determination of meaning. On the other hand, it appears that
matters of focus and presupposition, topic and comment, the scope of logical
elements, and pronominal reference are determined, in part at least, by surface
structure. The rules that relate syntactic structures to representations of meaning
are not at all well understood. In fact, the notion “representation of meaning” or
“semantic representation” is itself highly controversial. It is not clear at all that
it is possible to distinguish sharply between the contribution of grammar to the
determination of meaning, and the contribution of so-called “pragmatic considerations,” questions of fact and belief and context of utterance. It is perhaps

98

Language and Mind

worth mentioning that rather similar questions can be raised about the notion
“phonetic representation.” Although the latter is one of the best-established and
least controversial notions of linguistic theory, we can, nevertheless, raise the
question whether or not it is a legitimate abstraction, whether a deeper understanding of the use of language might not show that factors that go beyond
grammatical structure enter into the determination of perceptual representations
and physical form in an inextricable fashion, and cannot be separated, without
distortion, from the formal rules that interpret surface structure as phonetic
form.
So far, the study of language has progressed on the basis of a certain
abstraction: namely, we abstract away from conditions of use of language and
consider formal structures and the formal operations that relate them. Among
these formal structures are those of syntax, namely, deep and surface structures;
and also the phonetic and semantic representations, which we take to be certain
formal objects related to syntactic structures by certain well-defined operations.
This process of abstraction is in no way illegitimate, but one must understand
that it expresses a point of view, a hypothesis about the nature of mind, that is
not a priori obvious. It expresses the working hypothesis that we can proceed
with the study of “knowledge of language” – what is often called “linguistic
competence” – in abstraction from the problems of how language is used. The
working hypothesis is justified by the success that is achieved when it is adopted.
A great deal has been learned about the mechanisms of language, and, I would
say, about the nature of mind, on the basis of this hypothesis. But we must be
aware that in part, at least, this approach to language is forced upon us by the
fact that our concepts fail us when we try to study the use of language. We are
reduced to platitudes, or to observations which, though perhaps quite interesting, do not lend themselves to systematic study by means of the intellectual
tools presently available to us. On the other hand, we can bring to the study of
formal structures and their relations a wealth of experience and understanding.
It may be that at this point we are facing a problem of conflict between significance and feasibility, a conflict of the sort that I mentioned earlier in this paper.
I do not believe that this is the case, but it is possible. I feel fairly confident that
the abstraction to the study of formal mechanisms of language is appropriate;
my confidence arises from the fact that many quite elegant results have been
achieved on the basis of this abstraction. Still, caution is in order. It may be that
the next great advance in the study of language will require the forging of new
intellectual tools that permit us to bring into consideration a variety of questions that have been cast into the waste-bin of “pragmatics,” so that we could
proceed to study questions that we know how to formulate in an intelligible
fashion.
As noted, I think that the abstraction to linguistic competence is legitimate.
To go further, I believe that the inability of modern psychology to come to

Form and meaning in natural languages

99

grips with the problems of human intelligence is in part, at least, a result of its
unwillingness to undertake the study of abstract structures and mechanisms of
mind. Notice that the approach to linguistic structure that I have been outlining
has a highly traditional flavor to it. I think it is no distortion to say that this
approach makes precise a point of view that was inherent in the very important
work of the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century universal grammarians, and
that was developed, in various ways, in rationalist and romantic philosophy of
language and mind. The approach deviates in many ways from a more modern,
and in my opinion quite erroneous, conception that knowledge of language
can be accounted for as a system of habits, or in terms of stimulus-response
connections, principles of “analogy” and “generalization,” and other notions
that have been explored in twentieth-century linguistics and psychology, and
that develop from traditional empiricist speculation. The fatal inadequacy of
all such approaches, I believe, results from their unwillingness to undertake
the abstract study of linguistic competence. Had the physical sciences limited
themselves by similar methodological strictures, we would still be in the era of
Babylonian astronomy.
One traditional concept that has reemerged in current work is that of
“universal grammar,” and I want to conclude by saying just a word about this
topic. There are two kinds of evidence suggesting that deep-seated formal conditions are satisfied by the grammars of all languages. The first kind of evidence
is provided by the study of a wide range of languages. In attempting to construct generative grammars for languages of widely varied kinds, investigators
have repeatedly been led to rather similar assumptions as to the form and organization of such generative systems. But a more persuasive kind of evidence
bearing on universal grammar is provided by the study of a single language.
It may at first seem paradoxical that the intensive study of a single language
should provide evidence regarding universal grammar, but a little thought about
the matter shows that this is a very natural consequence.
To see this, consider the problem of determining the mental capacities that
make language acquisition possible. If the study of grammar – of linguistic
competence – involves an abstraction from language use, then the study of the
mental capacities that make acquisition of grammar possible involves a further,
second-order abstraction. I see no fault in this. We may formulate the problem
of determining the intrinsic characteristics of a device of unknown properties
that accepts as “input” the kind of data available to the child learning his first
language, and produces as “output” the generative grammar of that language.
The “output,” in this case, is the internally represented grammar, mastery of
which constitutes knowledge of the language. If we undertake to study the intrinsic structure of a language-acquisition device without dogma or prejudice, we
arrive at conclusions which, though of course only tentative, still seem to me
both significant and reasonably well-founded. We must attribute to this device

100

Language and Mind

enough structure so that the grammar can be constructed within the empirically
given constraints of time and available data, and we must meet the empirical
condition that different speakers of the same language, with somewhat different experience and training, nevertheless acquire grammars that are remarkably
similar, as we can determine from the ease with which they communicate and
the correspondences among them in the interpretation of new sentences. It is
immediately obvious that the data available to the child is quite limited – the
number of seconds in his lifetime is trivially small as compared with the range
of sentences that he can immediately understand and can produce in the appropriate manner. Having some knowledge of the characteristics of the acquired
grammars and the limitations on the available data, we can formulate quite
reasonable and fairly strong empirical hypotheses regarding the internal structure of the language-acquisition device that constructs the postulated grammars
from the given data. When we study this question in detail, we are, I believe,
led to attribute to the device a very rich system of constraints on the form of a
possible grammar; otherwise, it is impossible to explain how children come to
construct grammars of the kind that seem empirically adequate under the given
conditions of time and access to data. But if we assume, furthermore, that children are not genetically predisposed to learn one rather than another language,
then the conclusions we reach regarding the language-acquisition device are
conclusions regarding universal grammar. These conclusions can be falsified
by showing that they fail to account for the construction of grammars of other
languages, for example. And these conclusions are further verified if they serve
to explain facts about other languages. This line of argument seems to me very
reasonable in a general way, and when pursued in detail it leads us to strong
empirical hypotheses concerning universal grammar, even from the study of a
particular language.
I have discussed an approach to the study of language that takes this study to
be a branch of theoretical human psychology. Its goal is to exhibit and clarify the
mental capacities that make it possible for a human to learn and use a language.
As far as we know, these capacities are unique to man, and have no significant
analogue in any other organism. If the conclusions of this research are anywhere
near correct, then humans must be endowed with a very rich and explicit set of
mental attributes that determine a specific form of language on the basis of very
slight and rather degenerate data. Furthermore, they make use of the mentally
represented language in a highly creative way, constrained by its rules but free
to express new thoughts that relate to past experience or present sensations
only in a remote and abstract fashion. If this is correct, there is no hope in the
study of the “control” of human behavior by stimulus conditions, schedules of
reinforcement, establishment of habit structures, patterns of behavior, and so
on. Of course, one can design a restricted environment in which such control
and such patterns can be demonstrated, but there is no reason to suppose that

Form and meaning in natural languages

101

any more is learned about the range of human potentialities by such methods
than would be learned by observing humans in a prison or an army – or in
many a schoolroom. The essential properties of the human mind will always
escape such investigation. And if I can be pardoned a final “nonprofessional”
comment, I am very happy with this outcome.

5

The formal nature of language

General properties of language
Many generations of productive scholarship notwithstanding, the questions to
which this paper is addressed can receive only quite tentative answers. There are
few languages for which descriptions in depth are available, and only selected
aspects of language have been studied with sufficient care and success to provide support for conclusions of a general nature. Still, it is possible, with some
degree of confidence, to outline certain properties and conditions that distinguish human languages among arbitrary systems of symbolic manipulation,
communication, and self-expression.

Competence and performance
At the crudest level of description, we may say that a language associates sound
and meaning in a particular way; to have command of a language is to be able,
in principle, to understand what is said and to produce a signal with an intended
semantic interpretation. But aside from much unclarity, there is also a serious
ambiguity in this crude characterization of command of language. It is quite
obvious that sentences have an intrinsic meaning determined by linguistic rule
and that a person with command of a language has in some way internalized
the system of rules that determine both the phonetic shape of the sentence and
its intrinsic semantic content – that he has developed what we will refer to as
a specific linguistic competence. However, it is equally clear that the actual
observed use of language – actual performance – does not simply reflect the
intrinsic sound–meaning connections established by the system of linguistic
rules. Performance involves many other factors as well. We do not interpret what
is said in our presence simply by application of the linguistic principles that
determine the phonetic and semantic properties of an utterance. Extralinguistic
beliefs concerning the speaker and the situation play a fundamental role in
determining how speech is produced, identified, and understood. Linguistic
performance is, furthermore, governed by principles of cognitive structure (for
102

The formal nature of language

103

example, by memory restrictions) that are not, properly speaking, aspects of
language.
To study a language, then, we must attempt to disassociate a variety of factors
that interact with underlying competence to determine actual performance; the
technical term “competence” refers to the ability of the idealized speaker–hearer
to associate sounds and meanings strictly in accordance with the rules of his
language. The grammar of a language, as a model for idealized competence,1
establishes a certain relation between sound and meaning – between phonetic
and semantic representations. We may say that the grammar of the language L
generates a set of pairs (s, I), where s is the phonetic representation of a certain
signal2 and I is the semantic interpretation assigned to this signal by the rules
of the language. To discover this grammar is the primary goal of the linguistic
investigation of a particular language.
The general theory of linguistic structure is concerned with discovering the
conditions that any such grammar must meet. This general theory will be concerned with conditions of three kinds: conditions on the class of admissible
phonetic representations, the class of admissible semantic representations, and
the systems of rules that generate paired phonetic and semantic representations. In all three respects, human languages are subject to stringent limiting
conditions. There is no difficulty in constructing systems that do not meet these
conditions, and that do not, therefore, qualify as potential human languages
despite the fact that they associate sound and meaning in some definite way.
Human languages are systems of a highly specific kind. There is no a priori
necessity for a system relating sound and meaning to be of this kind. As this
paper proceeds, we shall mention some of the highly restrictive conditions that
appear to be essential properties of human language.
A grammar generates a certain set of pairs (s, I), where s is a phonetic
representation and I its associated semantic interpretation. Similarly, we might
think of a performance model as relating sound and meaning in a specific
way. A perceptual model, PM, for example, might be described, as in 1, as a
device that accepts a signal as input (along with much else) and assigns various
grammatical representations as “output.”
1

1
2

The term “grammar” is often used ambiguously to refer both to the internalized system of rules
and to the linguist’s description of it.
To be more precise, a certain class of signals that are repetitions of one another, in a sense to
which we return subsequently.

104

Language and Mind

A central problem for psychology is to discover the characteristics of a system PM of this sort. Clearly, in understanding a signal, a hearer brings to bear
information about the structure of his language. In other words, the model
PM incorporates the grammar G of a language. The study of how sentences
are understood – the general problem of speech perception – must, obviously,
remain within narrow limits unless it makes use of this basic property of a perceptual model. But it is important to distinguish clearly between the function
and properties of the perceptual model PM and the competence model G that it
incorporates. Both G and PM relate sound and meaning; but PM makes use of
much information beyond the intrinsic sound–meaning association determined
by the grammar G, and it operates under constraints of memory, time, and
organization of perceptual strategies that are not matters of grammar. Correspondingly, although we may describe the grammar G as a system of processes
and rules that apply in a certain order to relate sound and meaning, we are
not entitled to take this as a description of the successive acts of a performance
model such as PM – in fact, it would be quite absurd to do so. What we have said
regarding perceptual models is equally applicable to production models. The
grammatical rules that generate phonetic representations of signals with their
semantic interpretations do not constitute a model for the production of sentences, although any such model must incorporate the system of grammatical
rules. If these simple distinctions are overlooked, great confusion must result.
In this paper, attention is focused on competence and the grammars that characterize it; when speaking of semantic and phonetic interpretation of sentences,
we refer exclusively to the idealized representations determined by this underlying system. Performance provides data for the study of linguistic competence.
Competence, in the sense just described, is one of many factors that interact
to determine performance. In general, we would expect that in studying the
behavior of a complex organism, it will be necessary to isolate such essentially
independent underlying systems as the system of linguistic competence, each
with its intrinsic structure, for separate attention.
Initial steps toward a study of competence
Turning to the study of underlying competence, let us first take note of a few very
obvious properties of the grammar of a human language. It is, first of all, quite
clear that the set of paired phonetic and semantic representations generated
by the grammar will be infinite. There is no human language in which it is
possible, in fact or in principle, to specify a certain sentence as the longest
sentence meaningful in this language. The grammar of any language contains
devices that make it possible to form sentences of arbitrary complexity, each
with its intrinsic semantic interpretation. It is important to realize that this is no
mere logical nicety. The normal use of language relies in an essential way on

The formal nature of language

105

this unboundedness, on the fact that language contains devices for generating
sentences of arbitrary complexity. Repetition of sentences is a rarity; innovation,
in accordance with the grammar of the language, is the rule in ordinary day-byday performance. The idea that a person has a “verbal repertoire” – a stock of
utterances that he produces by “habit” on an appropriate occasion – is a myth,
totally at variance with the observed use of language. Nor is it possible to attach
any substance to the view that the speaker has a stock of “patterns” in which he
inserts words or morphemes. Such conceptions may apply to greetings, a few
cliches, and so on, but they completely misrepresent the normal use of language,
as the reader can easily convince himself by unprejudiced observation.3
To discover the grammar of some language user, we must begin by obtaining
information that bears on his interpretation of sentences, on the semantic, grammatical, and phonetic structure that he assigns to them. For example, for the
study of English, it would be important to discover such facts as the following.
Consider the sentence frames 2 and the words “persuaded,” “expected,” and
“happened”:
2

a.
b.
c.
d.

John – Bill that he should leave
John – Bill to leave
John – to leave
It is – that Bill will leave

The word “persuaded” can be inserted in a and b, but not c or d; “expected” can
be inserted in b, c, d, but not a; “happened” can be inserted only in c. Inserting
“persuaded” in a, we derive an ambiguous sentence, the interpretation of which
depends on the reference of “he”; under one interpretation, the sentence is a near
paraphrase of b, with “persuaded” inserted. When “expected” appears in b and
c, the subject–verb relation holds between “Bill” and “leave” in b, but between
“John” and “leave” in c. The sentence “John happened to leave” has roughly
the same meaning as “It happened that John left,” but “John expected to leave”
is not even a remote paraphrase of “It expected that John left.” Such facts as
these can be stated in many ways, and we might use one or another technique
to make sure of their accuracy. These are facts about the competence of the
speaker of English. They can be used as a basis for discovering his internalized
grammar.
Let us consider the status of such observations with slightly greater care.
These observations actually bear directly on the output of a perceptual model
3

Or by some simple calculations of the number of sentences and “patterns” that might be needed,
for empirical adequacy, in such repertoires. For some relevant comments, see G. A. Miller,
E. Galanter, and K. H. Pribram, Plans and the Structure of Behavior (New York: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston, 1960), pp. 145 f.; G. A. Miller and N. Chomsky, “Finitary Models of Language
Users,” in R. D. Luce, R. Bush, and E. Galanter, eds., Handbook of Mathematical Psychology
(New York: Wiley, 1963), Vol. II, p. 430.

106

Language and Mind

such as 1; they relate to the structures assigned to signals by the hearer. Our characterization of the output of 1 is a construct based on evidence of this sort. Then,
the perceptual model PM itself is a second-order construct. Abstracting further,
we can study the grammar that constitutes one fundamental component of 1
as a third-order construct. Thus the evidence cited in the preceding paragraph
actually has a bearing on grammar only indirectly. We must, in other words,
presuppose the legitimacy of each abstraction. There seems little question of the
legitimacy of abstraction in such cases as these, and there is an overwhelming
mass of evidence of the sort cited. Once again, we note that idealization of the
kind just described is inescapable if a complex organism is to be studied in a
serious way.
This process of abstraction can be carried one step further. Consider an
acquisition model AM that uses linguistic data to discover the grammar of the
language to which this data pertains.
3

Just how the device AM selects a grammar will be determined by its internal
structure, by the methods of analysis available to it, and by the initial constraints
that it imposes on any possible grammar. If we are given information about the
pairing of linguistic data and grammars, we may try to determine the nature
of the device AM. Although these are not the terms that have been used, linguistics has always been concerned with this question. Thus modern structural
linguistics has attempted to develop methods of analysis of a general nature,
independent of any particular language, and an older and now largely forgotten tradition attempted to develop a system of universal constraints that any
grammar must meet. We might describe both these attempts as concerned with
the internal structure of the device AM, with the innate conception of “human
language” that makes language acquisition possible.4
Universal grammar
Let us now turn to the study of underlying competence, and consider the general
problem of how a sound–meaning pairing might be established. As a preliminary to this investigation of universal grammar, we must ask how sounds and
meanings are to be represented. Since we are interested in human languages
in general, such systems of representation must be independent of any particular language. We must, in other words, develop a universal phonetics and a
4

The existence of innate mental structure is, obviously, not a matter of controversy. What we may
question is just what it is and to what extent it is specific to language.

The formal nature of language

107

universal semantics that delimit, respectively, the set of possible signals and
the set of possible semantic representations for any human language. It will
then be possible to speak of a language as a particular pairing of signals with
semantic interpretations, and to investigate the rules that establish this pairing. Our review of the general properties of language thus falls naturally into
three parts: a discussion of universal phonetics, of universal semantics, and of
the overarching system of universal grammar. The first two topics involve the
representation of idealized form and semantic content; the theory of universal
grammar deals with the mechanisms used in natural languages to determine the
form of a sentence and its semantic content.
The importance of developing a universal semantics and universal phonetics, in the sense of the last paragraph, was clearly recognized long before the
development of modern linguistics. For example, Bishop Wilkins in his Essay
Towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language (1668) attempted to
develop a universal phonetic alphabet and a universal catalogue of concepts in
terms of which, respectively, the signals and semantic interpretations for any
language can be represented. The phonetic alphabet is based on a system of phonetic properties developed in terms of point and manner of articulation. Each
phonetic symbol is analyzable as a set of such properties; in modern terms, it is
analyzable as a set of distinctive features. It is furthermore tacitly assumed that
the physical signal is determined, by language-independent principles, from its
representation in terms of phonetic symbols. The concepts that are proposed as
units of semantic interpretation are also analyzable into fixed properties (semantic features) of some sort, for example, animate-inanimate, relational-absolute,
agent-instrument, etc. It is tacitly assumed that the semantic interpretation of a
sentence is determined by universal, language-independent principles from the
concepts comprised in the utterance and the manner in which they are grammatically related (for example, as subject-predicate).5 Although the defects in
execution in such pioneering studies as that of Wilkins are obvious, the general approach is sound. The theory of universal phonetics has been intensively
pursued along the lines just indicated with considerable success; the parallel
theory of universal semantics has, in contrast, been very little studied.
Universal grammar: universal phonetics
The theory of universal phonetics attempts to establish a universal phonetic
alphabet and a system of laws. The alphabet defines the set of possible signals
from which the signals of a particular language are drawn. If the theory is correct, each signal of a language can be represented as a sequence of symbols of
5

This assumption is not explicit in Wilkins, but is developed in other seventeenth- and eighteenthcentury work. See my Cartesian Linguistics (New York: Harper & Row, 1966) for references
and discussion.

108

Language and Mind

the phonetic alphabet. Suppose that two physical events are represented as the
same sequence. Then in any language they must be repetitions of one another.6
On the other hand, two physical events might be regarded by speakers of one
language as repetitions and by speakers of another language as nonrepetitions.
In this case, the universal alphabet must provide the means for distinguishing
them. Representation in terms of the universal alphabet should provide whatever information is necessary to determine how the signal may be produced,
and it should, at the same time, correspond to a refined level of perceptual representation. We stress once again, however, that actual performance involves
other factors beyond ideal phonetic representation.
The symbols of the universal phonetic alphabet are not the “primitive
elements” of universal phonetic theory. These primitive elements include, rather,
what have been called (phonetic) distinctive features, properties such as voicing, frontness–backness, stress, etc.7 Each of these features can be thought of
as a scale in terms of which two or more values can be distinguished (how many
values need be distinguished is an open question, but the number is apparently
quite small for each feature). A symbol of the phonetic alphabet is properly to
be regarded as a set of features, each with a specified value. A signal, then, is
represented as a sequence of such sets.
Three obvious properties of language are reflected in a phonetic theory of this
sort. The first is its discreteness – the fact that only a determinable finite number
of signals of any given length can be nonrepetitions. The second property is the
unboundedness of language – the fact that a signal can be of arbitrary length,
so that a language will contain infinitely many semantically interpreted signals.
In addition to these formal properties, a phonetic theory of this sort reflects the
fact that two segments of a signal, represented by two symbols of the universal
alphabet, may be alike in certain respects and distinct in others; and that there
are, furthermore, a fixed number of such dimensions of sameness and difference
and a fixed number of potentially significant points along these dimensions.
Thus, the initial segments of pin and bin8 differ with respect to voicing and
aspiration but not (significantly) with respect to point of articulation; the two
consonants of cocoa differ with respect to neither point of articulation nor
voicing, but only with respect to aspiration; etc.
6

7

8

In an appropriate sense of repetition. Thus any two physical signals are in some way distinct, but
some of the differences are irrelevant in a particular language, and others are irrelevant in any
language.
A theory of phonetic distinctive features is developed in R. Jakobson, G. Fant, and M. Halle,
Preliminaries to Speech Analysis, 2nd edn (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT. Press, 1963). A revised
and, we think, improved version appears in N. Chomsky and M. Halle, Sound Pattern of English
(New York: Harper & Row, 1968).
Observe that although the order of phonetic segments is a significant fact, there is no reason to
assume that the physical event represented by a particular sequence of phonetic symbols can be
analyzed into successive parts, each associated with a particular symbol.

The formal nature of language

109

It is important to note that the distinctive features postulated in universal
phonetic theory are absolute in several senses but relative in others. They are
absolute in the sense that they are fixed for all languages. If phonetic representation is to provide sufficient information for identification of a physical signal,
then specification of feature values must also be absolute. On the other hand,
the features are relative when considered in terms of the notion of repetition–
nonrepetition. For example, given three absolute values designated 1, 2, 3 in
terms of the feature front–back, we might find that in language L1 two utterances that differ only in the values 1, 2 of frontness–backness are distinguished
as nonrepetitions but utterances differing only in the values 2, 3 are not; whereas
in language L2 the opposite might be the case. Each language would use the
feature front–back to distinguish nonrepetitions, but the absolute value 2 that
is “front” in one language would be “back” in the other.
In addition to a system of distinctive features, a universal phonetic theory will
also attempt to formulate certain laws that govern the permitted sequences and
permitted variety of selection in a particular language. For example, Jakobson
has observed that no language uses both the feature labialization and the feature velarization for distinguishing nonrepetitions, and he has suggested a more
general formulation in terms of which these two features can be regarded as
variants of a single, more abstract feature. Generalizations of this sort – particularly when they can be supported by rational argument – can be proposed as
laws of universal phonetics.
Universal grammar: universal semantics
Although universal phonetics is a fairly well-developed subject, the same cannot
be said of universal semantics. Here, too, we might hope to establish a universal
system of semantic features and laws regarding their interrelations and permitted
variety. In fact, the problem of determining such features and such laws has once
again become a topic of serious investigation in the past few years,9 and there
is some promise of fruitful development. It can be seen at once that an analysis
of concepts in terms of such features as animateness, action, etc. (see p. 107),
will hardly be adequate, and that certain features must be still more abstract. It
is, for example, a fact of English that the phrase “a good knife” means “a knife
which cuts well.” Consequently the concept “knife” must be specified in part
9

See J. Katz, The Philosophy of Language (New York: Harper & Row, 1965), for a review of some
recent work. For another view, see U. Weinreich, “Explorations in Semantic Theory,” in T. A.
Sebeok, ed., Current Trends in Linguistics, Vol. III of Linguistic Theory (The Hague: Mouton,
1966); and for comments on this and more extensive development of the topic, see J. Katz,
Semantic Theory (New York: Harper & Row, Publishers, 1972). In addition, there has been quite
a bit of recent work in descriptive semantics, some of which is suggestive with respect to the
problems discussed here.

110

Language and Mind

in terms of features having to do with characteristic functions (not just physical
properties), and in terms of an abstract “evaluation feature”10 that is determined
by such modifiers as “good,” “terrible,” etc. Only by such an analysis can the
semantic relationship between “this is a good knife” and “this knife cuts well” be
established. In contrast, the irrelevance of “this is a good knife for digging with”
to “this knife cuts well” shows that the semantic interpretation of a sentence is
determined by grammatical relations of a sort that are by no means transparent.
As in the case of universal phonetics, we might hope to establish general
principles regarding the possible systems of concepts that can be represented
in a human language and the intrinsic connections that may exist among them.
With the discovery of such principles, universal semantics would become a
substantive discipline.
Universal grammar: universal syntax
Suppose that a satisfactory theory of universal phonetics and of universal semantics were at hand. We could then define a language as a set of sentences, where
a sentence is a particular kind of sound–meaning pair, and go on to study the
systems of rules that define human languages. But in fact only the theory of
universal phonetics is sufficiently well established to support this enterprise.
Consequently, we must approach the study of language structure in a slightly
more indirect way.
Notice that although the notion “semantic representation” is itself far from
clear, we can, nevertheless, find innumerable empirical conditions that an explication of this notion must meet. Consider, for example, the following sentence:
4

What disturbed John was being disregarded by everyone.

It is clear, first of all, that this expression has two distinct interpretations.
Under one interpretation, it means that John was disturbed by the fact that
everyone disregarded him; under the second, it means that everyone was disregarding the things that disturb John. Under the first of these interpretations,
a certain grammatical relation holds between “disregard” and “John,” namely
the same relation that holds between these items in “Everyone disregards John”
(the “verb–object” relation). Under the second interpretation neither this nor any
other grammatically significant relation holds between “disregard” and “John.”
On the other hand, if we insert the word “our” between “was” and “being,” the
sentence is unambiguous, and no grammatical relation holds between “disregard” and “John,” although the verb–object relation now holds between “disregard” and “we” (an underlying element of “our”).
10

For discussion of this notion, see J. Katz, “Semantic Theory and the Meaning of ‘Good,’”
Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 61, No. 23, 1964.

The formal nature of language

111

Examples of this sort can be elaborated indefinitely. They provide conditions
of adequacy that the notion “semantic interpretation” must meet (for example,
relations of paraphrase and implication and the property of ambiguity must
be correctly reflected), and they illustrate clearly some of the ways in which
the semantic interpretations of linguistic expressions must be determined from
those of their grammatically related parts.
From such considerations, we are led to formulate a more restricted but quite
significant immediate goal for the study of linguistic structure. Still taking a
language to be a set of sentences, let us consider each abstract “sentence” to be a
specific pairing of a phonetic representation with an abstract structure of some
sort (let us call it a deep structure) that incorporates information relevant to
semantic interpretation. We can then study the system of rules that determines
this pairing, in a particular language, and the general characteristics of such
rules. This enterprise will be significant to the extent that these underlying
deep structures do actually provide a way to meet the empirical conditions on
semantic interpretation. Semantic theory, as it progresses, will then provide
means for enriching deep structures and associating semantic interpretations
with them. The empirical significance of a full theory of grammar, comprising
a universal phonetics, semantics, and syntax, will depend in part on the extent
to which conditions on semantic interpretation can be satisfied by systematic
use of the devices and principles that this theory supplies.
Summarizing these remarks, let us establish the following frame-work for
the study of linguistic structure. The grammar of a language is a system of
rules that determines a certain pairing of sound and meaning. It consists of a
syntactic component, a semantic component, and a phonological component.
The syntactic component defines a certain (infinite) class of abstract objects
(D, S), where D is a deep structure and S a surface structure. The deep structure contains all information relevant to semantic interpretation; the surface
structure, all information relevant to phonetic interpretation. The semantic and
phonological components are purely interpretive. The former assigns semantic
interpretations to deep structures; the latter assigns phonetic interpretations to
surface structures. Thus the grammar as a whole relates semantic and phonetic
interpretations, the association being mediated by the rules of the syntactic component that define paired deep and surface structures. The study of the three
components will, of course, be highly integrated; each can be investigated to
the extent that it is clear what conditions the others impose upon it.
This formulation should be regarded as an informal first approximation.
When we develop a precise theory of grammatical structure – for example, the
particular version of the theory of transformational grammar sketched below –
we will provide a technical meaning for the terms “deep structure” and “surface structure,” and in terms of these technical meanings, we can then raise
the empirical (not conceptual) question of how deep and surface structures

112

Language and Mind

contribute to and determine semantic and phonetic interpretations. In the technical sense that is given to the concepts of deep and surface structure in the
theory outlined below, it seems to me that present information suggests that
surface structure completely determines phonetic interpretation and that deep
structure completely determines certain highly significant aspects of semantic interpretation. But the looseness of the latter term makes a more definite
statement impossible. In fact, I think that a reasonable explication of the term
“semantic interpretation” would lead to the conclusion that surface structure
also contributes in a restricted but important way to semantic interpretation, but
I will say no more about this matter here.
Universal grammar might be defined as the study of the conditions that
must be met by the grammars of all human languages. Universal semantics and
phonetics, in the sense described earlier, will then be a part of universal grammar.
So defined, universal grammar is nothing other than the theory of language
structure. This seems in accord with traditional usage. However, only certain
aspects of universal grammar were studied until quite recently. In particular, the
problem of formulating the conditions that must be met by the rules of syntax,
phonology, and semantics was not raised in any explicit way in traditional
linguistics, although suggestive and nontrivial steps toward the study of this
problem are implicit in much traditional work.11
A grammar of the sort described previously, which attempts to characterize in an explicit way the intrinsic association of phonetic form and semantic
content in a particular language, might be called a generative grammar12 to
distinguish it from descriptions that have some different goal (for example,
pedagogic grammars). In intention, at least, traditional scholarly grammars are
generative grammars, although they fall far short of achieving the goal of determining how sentences are formed or interpreted. A good traditional grammar
gives a full exposition of exceptions to rules, but it provides only hints and
examples to illustrate regular structures (except for trivial cases – for example,
inflectional paradigms). It is tacitly presumed that the intelligent reader will
use his “linguistic intuition” – his latent, unconscious knowledge of universal
grammar – to determine the regular structures from the presented examples
and remarks. The grammar itself does not express the deep-seated regularities
of the language. For the purpose of the study of linguistic structure, particular
or universal, such grammars are, therefore, of limited value. It is necessary to
11
12

See Chomsky, Cartesian Linguistics, for discussion.
See p. 91. In general, a set of rules that recursively define an infinite set of objects may be said
to generate this set. Thus a set of axioms and rules of inference for arithmetic may be said to
generate a set of proofs and a set of theorems of arithmetic (last lines of proofs). Similarly, a
(generative) grammar may be said to generate a set of structural descriptions, each of which,
ideally, incorporates a deep structure, a surface structure, a semantic interpretation (of the deep
structure), and a phonetic interpretation (of the surface structure).

The formal nature of language

113

extend them to full generative grammars if the study of linguistic structure is
to be advanced to the point where it deals significantly with regularities and
general principles. It is, however, important to be aware of the fact that the
concept “generative grammar” itself is no very great innovation. The fact that
every language “makes infinite use of finite means” (Wilhelm von Humboldt)
has long been understood. Modern work in generative grammar is simply an
attempt to give an explicit account of how these finite means are put to infinite
use in particular languages and to discover the deeper properties that define
“human language,” in general (that is, the properties that constitute universal
grammar).
We have been concerned thus far only with clarification of concepts and
setting of goals. Let us now turn to the problem of formulating hypotheses of
universal grammar.
Structure of the phonological component
The syntactic component of a generative grammar defines (generates) an infinite
set of pairs (D, S), where D is a deep structure and S is a surface structure; the
interpretive components of the grammar assign a semantic representation to D
and a phonetic representation to S.
Let us first consider the problem of assigning phonetic representations to
surface structures. As in the previous discussion of universal phonetics, we
take a phonetic representation to be a sequence of symbols of the universal
phonetic alphabet, each symbol being analyzed into distinctive features with
specific values. Stating the same idea slightly differently, we may think of a
phonetic representation as a matrix in which rows correspond to features of the
universal system, columns correspond to successive segments (symbols of the
phonetic alphabet), and each entry is an integer that specifies the value of a
particular segment with respect to the feature in question. Our problem, then,
is to determine what information must be contained in the surface structure,
and how the rules of the phonological component of the grammar use this
information to specify a phonetic matrix of the sort just described.
Consider once again the example 4, which we repeat in 5 for ease of reference:
5

What # disturb-ed # John # was # be-ing # dis-regard-ed # by # everyone.

To first approximation,13 we may think of 5 as a sequence of the formatives
“what,” “disturb,” “ed,” “John,” “was,” “be,” “ing,” “dis,” “regard,” “ed,” “by,”
“every,” “one,” with the junctures represented by the symbols # and – in the
13

The analysis that is presented here for purposes of exposition would have to be refined for
empirical adequacy.

114

Language and Mind

positions indicated in 5. These junctures specify the manner in which formatives
are combined; they provide information which is required by the interpretive
rules of the phonological component. A juncture must, in fact, be analyzed as a
set of features, that is, as a single-column matrix in which the rows correspond
to certain features of the junctural system and each entry is one of two values
which we may represent as + or –. Similarly, each formative will be analyzed
as a matrix in which columns stand for successive segments, rows correspond
to certain categorial features, and each entry is either + or –. Therefore, the
entire sentence 5 can be regarded as a single matrix with the entries + and –.14
The categorial features include the universal features of the phonetic system,
along with diacritic features which essentially indicate exceptions to rules. Thus
the matrix corresponding to “what,” in the dialect in which the corresponding
phonetic representation is [wat], will contain three segments, the first specified
as a labial glide, the second as a low back unrounded vowel, the third as an
unvoiced dental stop consonant (these specifications given completely in terms
of the + and – values of features supplied by the universal phonetic system). The
rules of the phonological component, in this case, will convert this specification
in terms of + and – values into a more detailed specification in terms of integers,
in which the value of each segment with respect to the phonetic features (for
example, tongue height, degree of aspiration, etc.) is indicated to whatever
degree of accuracy is required by the presupposed theory of universal phonetics,
and with whatever range of variation is allowed by the language. In this example,
the assigned values will simply refine the bifurcation into + and – values given
in the underlying matrix for “what” in 5.
The example just cited is unusually simple, however. In general, the rules
of the phonological component will not only give a finer specification of the
underlying division into + and – values, but will also change values significantly
and, perhaps, insert, delete, or rearrange segments. For example, the formative
“by” will be represented with an underlying matrix consisting of two columns,
the second of which is specified as a high front-vowel (specification given in
terms of values of features). The corresponding phonetic matrix, however, will
consist of three columns, the second of which is specified as a low back-vowel
and the third as a palatal glide (the specification here being in terms of integral
valued entries in a phonetic matrix).15
The surface structure of 5, then, is represented as a matrix in which one of two
values appears in each entry. The fact that only two values may appear indicates
14

15

Notice that every two successive formatives are separated by a juncture, as is necessary if the
representation of 5 as a single matrix is to preserve the formative structure. For present purposes,
we may think of each segment of a formative as unmarked for all junctural features and each
juncture as unmarked for each formative feature.
The reasons for this analysis go beyond the scope of this discussion. For details see Chomsky
and Halle, Sound Pattern of English.

The formal nature of language

115

that this underlying matrix really serves a purely classificatory function. Each
sentence is classified in such a way as to distinguish it from all other sentences,
and in such a way as to determine just how the rules of the phonological component assign specific positional phonetic values. We see, then, that the distinctive
features of the universal phonetic system have a classificatory function in the
underlying matrix constituting a part of the surface structure, and a phonetic
function in the matrix constituting the phonetic representation of the sentence
in question. Only in the former function are the distinctive features uniformly
binary; only in the latter do they receive a direct physical interpretation.
The underlying classificatory matrix just described does not exhaust the information required by the interpretive phonological rules. Beyond this, it is necessary to know how the sentence in question is subdivided into phrases of varying
size, and what types of phrase these are. In the case of 5, for example, phonological interpretation requires the information that “disturb” and “disregard” are
verbs, that “what disturbed John” is a noun phrase, that “John was being” is not
a phrase at all, and so on. The relevant information can be indicated by a proper
bracketing of the sentence with labeled brackets.16 The unit contained within
paired brackets [A and] A will be referred to as a phrase of the category A. For
example, the sequence “what # disturbed # John” in 5 will be enclosed within
the brackets [np,]np, indicating that it is a noun phrase; the formative “disturb”
will be enclosed within the brackets [v,]v, indicating that it is a verb; the whole
expression 5 will be enclosed within the brackets [s,]s, indicating that it is a
sentence; the sequence “John was being” will not be enclosed within paired
brackets, since it is no phrase at all. To take an extremely simple example, the
sentence “John saw Bill” might be represented in the following way as a surface
structure, where each orthographically represented item is to be regarded as a
classificatory matrix:
6

 
   
  
   
s np nJohn n np vp vsaw v np nBill n np vp s

This representation indicates that “John” and “Bill” are nouns (N’s) and “saw”
a verb (V); that “John” and “Bill” are, furthermore, noun phrases (NP’s); that
“saw Bill” is a verb phrase (VP); and that “John saw Bill” is a sentence (S). It
seems that interpretation of a sentence by the phonological component of the
grammar invariably requires information which can be represented in the way
just described. We therefore postulate that the surface structure of a sentence
is a properly labeled bracketing of a classificatory matrix of formatives and
junctures.
16

In the obvious sense. Thus [a . . . [b . . .] b . . . [c . . .] c . . .] a would, for example, be a proper
bracketing of the string . . . in terms of the labeled brackets [a ,] a , [b ,] b , [c ,] c , but neither of
the following would be proper bracketing:
[ a . . . [b . . .] a ; [a . . . [b . . .] a . . .] b

116

Language and Mind

The phonological component of a grammar converts a surface structure into a
phonetic representation. We have now given a rough specification of the notions
“surface structure” and “phonetic representations.” It remains to describe the
rules of the phonological component and the manner in which they are organized.
The evidence presently available suggests that the rules of the phonological
component are linearly ordered in a sequence R1 , . . . Rn , and that this sequence
of rules applies in a cyclic fashion to a surface structure in the following way. In
the first cycle of application, the rules R1 , . . . , Rn apply in this order to a maximal
continuous part of the surface structure containing no internal brackets. After
the last of these rules has applied, innermost brackets are erased and the second
cycle of application is initiated. In this cycle, the rules again apply in the given
order to a maximal continuous part of the surface structure containing no internal
brackets. Innermost brackets are then erased, and the third cycle is initiated.
The process continues until the maximal domain of phonological processes (in
simple cases, the entire sentence) is reached. Certain of the rules are restricted
in application to the level of word-boundary – they apply in the cycle only when
the domain of application is a full word. Others are free to iterate at every stage
of application. Notice that the principle of cyclic application is highly intuitive.
It states, in effect, that there is a fixed system of rules that determines the form
of large units from the (ideal) form of their constituent parts.
We can illustrate the principle of cyclic application with some rules of
stress assignment in English. It seems to be a fact that although phonetic
representations for English must allow five or six different values along the
distinctive feature of stress, nevertheless, all segments can be unmarked with
respect to stress in surface structures – that is, stress has no categorial function
(except highly marginally) as a distinctive feature for English. The complex
stress contours of the phonetic representation are determined by such rules as
7 and 8.17
7

Assign primary stress to the left-most of two primary stressed vowels,
in nouns.

8

Assign primary stress to the right-most stress-peak, where a vowel V
is a stress-peak in a certain domain if this domain contains no vowel
more heavily stressed than V.

Rule 7 applies to nouns with two primary stresses; rule 8 applies to a unit of
any other kind. The rules apply in the order 7, 8, in the cyclic manner described
above. By convention, when primary stress is assigned in a certain position, all
17

These are simplified, for expository purposes. See Chomsky and Halle, Sound Pattern of English,
for a more accurate account. Notice that in this exposition we are using the term “applies”
ambiguously, in the sense of “available for application” and also in the sense of “actually
modifies the sequence under consideration.”

The formal nature of language

117

other stresses are weakened by one. Notice that if a domain contains no stressed
vowel, then rule 8 will assign primary stress to its right-most vowel.
To illustrate these rules, consider first the surface structure 6. In accordance
with the general principle of cyclic application, the rules 7 and 8 first apply to the
innermost units [n John]n, [v saw]v, and [n Bill]n. Rule 7 is inapplicable; rule
8 applies, assigning primary stress to the single vowel in each case. Innermost
1

brackets are then erased. The next cycle deals with the units [np John]np and
1

[np Bill]np and simply reassigns primary stress to the single vowel, by rule 8
1

1

Innermost brackets are then erased, and we have the unit [vp saw Bill]vp as the
domain of application of the rules. Rule 7 is again inapplicable, since this is not
a noun; rule 8 assigns primary stress to the vowel of “Bill,” weakening the stress
on “saw” to secondary. Innermost brackets are erased, and we have the unit
1

1

2

[s John saw Bill ]s as the domain of application. Rule 7 is again inapplicable,
and rule 8 assigns primary stress to “Bill,” weakening the other stresses and
2

1

3

giving “ John saw Bill ” which can be accepted as an ideal representation of
the stress contour.
Consider now the slightly more complex example “John’s black-board
eraser.” In the first application of the cycle, rules 7 and 8 apply to the innermost bracketed units “John,” “black,” “board,” “erase”; rule 7 is inapplicable,
and rule 8 assigns primary stress in each case to the right-most vowel (the
only vowel, in the first three). The next cycle involves the units “John’s” and
“eraser,” and is vacuous.18 The domain of application for the next cycle is
1

1

[n black board ]n. Being a noun, this unit is subject to rule 7, which assigns
primary stress to “black,” weakening the stress on “board” to secondary. Innermost brackets are erased, and the domain of application for the next cycle is
1

2

1

[n balck board eraser ]n. Again rule 7 applies, assigning primary stress to
“black” and weakening all other stresses by one. In the final cycle, the domain
1

1

3

2

of application of the rules is [np John’s black board eraser ]np. Rule 7 is
inapplicable, since this is a full noun phrase. Rule 8 assigns primary stress
to the right-most primary stressed vowel, weakening all the others and giving
2

1

4

3

“ John’s black board eraser .” In this way, a complex phonetic representation

18

The word “eraser” is, at this stage, bisyllabic.

118

Language and Mind

is determined by independently motivated and very simple rules, applying in
accordance with the general principle of the cycle.
This example is characteristic and illustrates several important points. The
grammar of English must contain the rule 7 so as to account for the fact that
the stress contour is falling in the case of the noun “blackboard,” and it must
contain rule 8, to account for the rising contour of the phrase “black board”
( “board which is black”). The principle of the cycle is not, strictly speaking,
part of the grammar of English but is rather a principle of universal grammar that determines the application of the particular rules of English or any
other language, whatever these rules may be. In the case illustrated, the general
principle of cyclic application assigns a complex stress contour, as indicated.
Equipped with the principle of the cycle and the two rules 7 and 8, a person
will know19 the proper stress contour for “John’s blackboard eraser” and innumerable other expressions which he may never have heard previously. This is
a simple example of a general property of language; certain universal principles must interrelate with specific rules to determine the form (and meaning)
of entirely new linguistic expressions.
This example also lends support to a somewhat more subtle and far-reaching
hypothesis. There is little doubt that such phenomena as stress contours in
English are a perceptual reality; trained observers will, for example, reach a high
degree of unanimity in recording new utterances in their native language. There
is, however, little reason to suppose that these contours represent a physical
reality. It may very well be the case that stress contours are not represented in
the physical signal in anything like the perceived detail. There is no paradox
in this. If just two levels of stress are distinguished in the physical signal, then
the person who is learning English will have sufficient evidence to construct
the rules 7 and 8 (given the contrast “blackboard,” “black board,” for example).
Assuming then that he knows the principle of the cycle, he will be able to
perceive the stress contour of “John’s blackboard eraser” even if it is not a
physical property of the signal. The evidence now available strongly suggests
that this is an accurate description of how stress is perceived in English.
It is important to see that there is nothing mysterious in this description. There
would be no problem in principle in designing an automaton that uses the rules 7
and 8, the rules of English syntax, and the principle of the transformational cycle
to assign a multi-leveled stress contour even to an utterance in which stress is not
represented at all (for example, a sentence spelled in conventional orthography).
The automaton would use the rules of syntax to determine the surface structure
of the utterance, and would then apply the rules 7 and 8, in accordance with
the principle of the cycle, to determine the multi-leveled contour. Taking such
an automaton as a first approximation to a model for speech perception (see 1,
19

As earlier, we refer here to “tacit” or “latent knowledge,” which can, perhaps, be brought to
consciousness with proper attention but is surely not presented to “unguided intuition.”

The formal nature of language

119

p. 103), we might propose that the hearer uses certain selected properties of the
physical signal to determine which sentence of the language was produced and
to assign to it a deep and surface structure. With careful attention, he will then be
able to “hear” the stress contour assigned by the phonological component of his
grammar, whether or not it corresponds to any physical property of the presented
signal. Such an account of speech perception assumes, putting it loosely, that
syntactic interpretation of an utterance may be a prerequisite to “hearing” its
phonetic representation in detail; it rejects the assumption that speech perception
requires a full analysis of phonetic form followed by a full analysis of syntactic
structure followed by semantic interpretation, as well as the assumption that
perceived phonetic form is an accurate point-by-point representation of the
signal. But it must be kept in mind that there is nothing to suggest that either
of the rejected assumptions is correct, nor is there anything at all mysterious
in the view just outlined that rejects these assumptions. In fact, the view just
outlined is highly plausible, since it can dispense with the claim that some
presently undetectable physical properties of utterances are identified with an
accuracy that goes beyond anything experimentally demonstrable even under
ideal conditions, and it can account for the perception of stress contours of novel
utterances20 on the very simple assumption that rules 7 and 8 and the general
principle of cyclic application are available to the perceptual system.
There is a great deal more to be said about the relative merits of various kinds
of perceptual models. Instead of pursuing this topic, let us consider further the
hypothesis that rules 7 and 8, and the principle of cyclic application, are available
to the perceptual system and are used in the manner suggested. It is clear how
rules 7 and 8 might be learned from simple examples of rising and falling contour
(for example, “black board” contrasted with “blackboard”). But the question
then arises: how does a person learn the principle of cyclic application? Before
facing this question, it is necessary to settle one that is logically prior to it:
why assume that the principle is learned at all? There is much evidence that the
principle is used, but from this it does not follow that it has been learned. In fact,
it is difficult to imagine how such a principle might be learned, uniformly by
all speakers, and it is by no means clear that sufficient evidence is available in
the physical signal to justify this principle. Consequently, the most reasonable
conclusion seems to be that the principle is not learned at all, but rather that it
is simply part of the conceptual equipment that the learner brings to the task
of language acquisition. A rather similar argument can be given with respect to
other principles of universal grammar.
Notice again that there should be nothing surprising in such a conclusion.
There would be no difficulty, in principle, in designing an automaton which
20

And other aspects. The argument is, in fact, much more general. It must be kept in mind that
speech perception is often impaired minimally, or not at all, even by significant distortion of the
signal, a fact difficult to reconcile with the view that phonetic analysis in detail is a prerequisite
for analysis of the syntactic and semantic structure.

120

Language and Mind

incorporates the principles of universal grammar and puts them to use to determine which of the possible languages is the one to which it is exposed. A priori,
there is no more reason to suppose that these principles are themselves learned
than there is to suppose that a person learns to interpret visual stimuli in terms
of line, angle, contour, distance, or, for that matter, that he learns to have two
arms. It is completely a question of empirical fact; there is no information of any
general extralinguistic sort that can be used, at present, to support the assumption that some principle of universal grammar is learned, or that it is innate,
or (in some manner) both. If linguistic evidence seems to suggest that some
principles are unlearned, there is no reason to find this conclusion paradoxical
or surprising.
Returning to the elaboration of principles of universal grammar, it seems that
the phonological component of a grammar consists of a sequence of rules that
apply in a cyclic manner, as just described, to assign a phonetic representation
to a surface structure. The phonetic representation is a matrix of phonetic feature specifications and the surface structure is a properly labeled bracketing of
formatives which are, themselves, represented in terms of marking of categorial
distinctive features. What evidence is now available supports these assumptions;
they provide the basis for explaining many curious features of phonetic fact.
It is important to notice that there is no a priori necessity for the phonological
component of a grammar to have just these properties. These assumptions about
universal grammar restrict the class of possible human languages to a very
special subset of the set of imaginable “languages.” The evidence available to
us suggests that these assumptions pertain to the language acquisition device
AM of 3, p. 106, that is that they form one part of the schematism that the child
brings to the problem of language learning. That this schematism must be quite
elaborate and highly restrictive seems fairly obvious. If it were not, language
acquisition, within the empirically known limits of time, access, and variability,
would be an impenetrable mystery. Considerations of the sort mentioned in the
foregoing discussion are directly relevant to the problem of determining the
nature of these innate mechanisms, and, therefore, deserve extremely careful
study and attention.
Structure of the semantic component
Let us now consider the second interpretive component of a generative grammar,
the system of rules that converts a deep structure into a semantic representation
that expresses the intrinsic meaning of the sentence in question. Although many
aspects of semantic interpretation remain quite obscure, it is still quite possible
to undertake a direct investigation of the theory of deep structures and their
interpretation, and certain properties of the semantic component seem fairly
clear. In particular, as we have noted earlier, many empirical conditions on

The formal nature of language

121

semantic interpretation can be clearly formulated. For example, we know that
sentence 4 on p. 110 must be assigned at least two semantic representations,
and that one of these must be essentially the same as the interpretation assigned
to both 9 and 10.
9
10

Being disregarded by everyone disturbed John.
The fact that everyone disregarded John disturbed him.21

Furthermore, it is clear that the semantic representation of a sentence depends
on the representation of its parts, as in the parallel case of phonetic interpretation. For example, in the case of 10, it is obvious that the semantic interpretation
depends, in part, on the semantic interpretation of “Everyone disregarded John”;
if the latter were replaced in 10 by “Life seemed to pass John by,” the interpretation of the whole would be changed in a fixed way. This much is transparent, and
it suggests that a principle like the principle of cyclic application in phonology
should hold in the semantic component.
A slightly more careful look at the problem shows that semantic interpretation must be significantly more abstract than phonological interpretation with
respect to the notion of “constituent part.” Thus the interpretation of “Everyone disregarded John” underlies not only 10, but also 9 and 4, and in exactly
the same way. But neither 4 nor 9 contains “everyone disregarded John” as a
constituent part, as does 10 . In other words, the deep structures underlying 9
and 10 should both be identical (or very similar) to one of two deep structures
underlying 4, despite the wide divergence in surface structure and phonetic
form. It follows that we cannot expect deep structure to be very close to surface
structure in general.
In the case of a sentence like 6 ( “John saw Bill”), there is little difference
between deep and surface structure. Semantic interpretation would not be far
from the mark, in this case, if it were quite parallel to phonetic interpretation.
Thus the interpretation of “saw Bill” can be derived from that of “saw”22 and
that of “Bill,” and the interpretation of 6 can be determined from that of “John”
and that of “saw Bill.” To carry out such interpretation we must know not only
the bracketing of 6 into constituents, but also the grammatical relations that
are represented; that is, we must know that “Bill” is the direct-object of “saw”
and that the subject–predicate relation holds between “John” and “saw Bill” in
“John saw Bill.” Similarly, in the slightly more complex case of “John saw Bill
leave,” we must know that the subject–predicate relation holds between “John”
and “saw Bill leave” and also between “Bill” and “leave.”
21
22

The latter is again ambiguous in an entirely different way from 4, depending on the reference
of “him.” We will assume, throughout, that it refers to John.
But the interpretation of this depends on that of “see” and that of “past tense”; hence, these
separate items must be represented in the deep structure, though not, in this case, in the surface
structure.

122

Language and Mind

Notice that at least in such simple cases as 6, we already have a mechanism for
representing grammatical relations of just the sort that are required for semantic
interpretation. Suppose that we define the relations subject-of as the relation
holding between a noun phrase and a sentence of which it is an immediate
constituent23 and the relation predicate-of as holding between a verb phrase
and a sentence of which it is an immediate constituent. The subject–predicate
relation can then be defined as the relation holding between the subject of a
sentence and the predicate of this sentence. Thus, in these terms, “John” is
the subject and “saw Bill (leave)” the predicate of “John saw Bill (leave),”
and the subject–predicate relation holds between the two. In the same way, we
can define the relation direct-object (in terms of the immediate constituency of
verb and noun phrase in verb phrase) and others in a perfectly appropriate and
satisfactory way. But returning now to 6, this observation implies that a labeled
bracketing will serve as the deep structure (just as a labeled bracketing will serve
as the surface structure); it contains just the information about constituency and
about grammatical relations that is required for semantic interpretation.
We noted that in “John saw Bill leave” the subject–predicate relation holds
between “Bill” and “leave,” as well as between “John” and “saw Bill leave.” If
6 or something very much like it – see, for example, note 22 – is to be taken as
the deep structure, with grammatical relations defined as previously, then the
deep structure of “John saw Bill leave” will have to be something like 11 (many
details omitted):
  John    saw    Bill    leave     
11
s np
np vp v
v s np np vp v
v vp s vp s
The labeled bracketing 11 expresses the subject–predicate relation between
“John” and “saw Bill leave” and between “Bill” and “leave,” as required.
Moving to a somewhat more complex example, the sentences 9 and 10 (as
well as 4 under one interpretation) will each have to contain something like 12
in the deep structure:
  everyone    disregards   John   
12
s np
np vp v
v np
np vp s
If this requirement is met, then we will be able to account for the fact that,
obviously, the meaning of 4 (= “what disturbed John was being disregarded
by everyone”) in one interpretation of 9 (= “being disregarded by everyone
disturbed John”) is determined in part by the fact that the direct-object relation holds between “disregard” and “John” and the subject–predicate relation
23

A phrase X is an immediate constituent of the phrase Y containing X if there is no phrase Z which
contains X and is contained in Y. Thus, the noun phrase “John” is an immediate constituent of the
sentence “John saw Bill” [analyzed as in 6], but the noun phrase “Bill” is not, being contained in
the intervening phrase “saw Bill.” “John saw” is not an immediate constituent of the sentence,
since it is not a phrase; “John” is not an immediate constituent of “John saw,” since the latter is
not a phrase. Notice that the definitions proposed here for grammatical functions and relations
make sense only when restricted to deep structures, in general.

The formal nature of language

123

between “everyone” and “disregards John,” despite the fact that these relations
are in no way indicated in the surface structure in 4 or 9.
From many such examples, we are led to the following conception of how the
semantic component functions. This interpretive component of the full generative grammar applies to a deep structure and assigns to it a semantic representation, formulated in terms of the still quite obscure notions of universal semantics. The deep structure is a labeled bracketing of minimal “meaning-bearing”
elements. The interpretive rules apply cyclically, determining the semantic interpretation of a phrase X of the deep structure from the semantic interpretations
of the immediate constituents of X and the grammatical relation represented in
this configuration of X and its parts.
Superficially, at least, the two interpretive components of the grammar are
rather similar in the way in which they operate, and they apply to objects of
essentially the same sort (labeled bracketings). But the deep structure of a
sentence will, in nontrivial cases, be quite different from its surface structure.
Notice that if the notions “noun phrase,” “verb phrase,” “sentence,” “verb,”
can receive a language-independent characterization within universal grammar,
then the grammatical relations defined above (similarly, others that we might
define in the same way) will also receive a universal characterization. It seems
that this may be possible, and certain general lines of approach to such a characterization seem clear (see p. 139). We might then raise the question of whether
the semantic component of a grammar contains such particular rules as the rules
7 and 8 of the phonological component of English or whether, alternatively, the
principles of semantic interpretation belong essentially to universal grammar.
However, we will put aside these and other questions relating to the semantic
component, and turn next to the discussion of the one noninterpretive component of the grammar – which we have called its “syntactic component.” Notice
that as in the case of the phonological component, insofar as principles of interpretation can be assigned to universal rather than particular grammar, there is
little reason to suppose that they are learned or that they could in principle be
learned.
Structure of the syntactic component
The syntactic component of a grammar must generate (see note 12) pairs (D, S),
where D is a deep structure and S an associated surface structure. The surface
structure S is a labeled bracketing of a sequence of formatives and junctures.
The deep structure D is a labeled bracketing that determines a certain network
of grammatical functions and grammatical relations among the elements and
groups of elements of which it is composed. Obviously, the syntactic component must have a finite number of rules (or rule schemata), but these must be so
organized that an infinite number of pairs (D, S) of deep and surface structures

124

Language and Mind

can be generated, one corresponding to each interpreted sentence (phonetically
and semantically interpreted, that is) of the language.24 In principle, there are
various ways in which such a system might be organized. It might, for example,
consist of independent rules generating deep and surface structures and certain
conditions of compatibility relating them, or of rules generating surface structures combined with rules mapping these into the associated deep structure,
or of rules generating deep structures combined with rules mapping these into
surface structures.25 Choice among these alternatives is a matter of fact, not
decision. We must ask which of the alternatives makes possible the deepest
generalizations and the most far-reaching explanation of linguistic phenomena
of various sorts. As with other aspects of universal grammar, we are dealing here
with a set of empirical questions; crucial evidence may be difficult to obtain,
but we cannot conclude from this that there is, in principle, no right and wrong
in the matter.
Of the many alternatives that might be suggested, the linguistic evidence
now available seems to point consistently to the conclusion that the syntactic
component consists of rules that generate deep structures combined with rules
mapping these into associated surface structures. Let us call these two systems of
rules the base and the transformational components of the syntax, respectively.
The base system is further subdivided into two parts: the categorial system and
the lexicon. Each of these three subparts of the syntax has a specific function to
perform, and there seem to be heavy universal constraints that determine their
form and interrelation. The general structure of a grammar would, then, be as
depicted in diagram 13:
13

The mapping S is carried out by the semantic component; T by the transformational component; and P by the phonological component. Generation of deep
structures by the base system (by operation B) is determined by the categorial
system and the lexicon.
The lexicon is a set of lexical entries; each lexical entry, in turn, can be
regarded as a set of features of various sorts. Among these are the phonological
24

25

In fact, we might think of a grammar as assigning a semantic interpretation to all possible
sentences (this being a clear notion, given theories of universal phonetics and semantics),
including those that deviate from rules of the language. But this is a matter that we will not go
into any further here.
The question of how the syntactic component is organized should not be confused, as it all too
often is, with the problem of developing a model of performance (production or perception). In
fact, any of the kinds of organization just described (and others) could be used as the basis for
a theory of performance of either kind.

The formal nature of language

125

features and the semantic features that we have already mentioned briefly.
The phonological features can be thought of as indexed as to position (that
is, first, second, etc.); aside from this, each is simply an indication of marking
with respect to one of the universal distinctive features (regarded here in their
categorial function) or with respect to some diacritic feature (see p. 114), in
the case of irregularity. Thus the positionally indexed phonological features
constitute a distinctive feature matrix with the entries given as + or – values,
as described earlier. The semantic features constitute a “dictionary definition.”
As noted previously, some of these at least must be quite abstract; there may,
furthermore, be intrinsic connections of various sorts among them that are
sometimes referred to as “field structure.” In addition, the lexical entry contains
syntactic features that determine the positions in which the entry in question
may appear, and the rules that may apply to structures containing it as these
are converted into surface structures. In general, the lexical entry contains all
information about the item in question that cannot be accounted for by general
rule.
Aside from lexical entries, the lexicon will contain redundancy rules that
modify the feature content of a lexical entry in terms of general regularities.
For example, the fact that vowels are voiced or that humans are animate requires
no specific mention in particular lexical entries. Much of the redundant lexical
information can, no doubt, be provided by general conventions (that is, rules of
universal grammar) rather than by redundancy rules of the language.
The lexicon is concerned with all properties, idiosyncratic or redundant, of
individual lexical items. The categorial component of the base determines all
other aspects of deep structure. It seems that the categorial component is what
is called a simple or context-free phrase-structure grammar. Just what such a
system is can be understood quite easily from a simple example. Suppose that
we have the rules 14:
14

S → NP VP
VP → V NP
NP → N
N →
V →

With these rules we construct the derivation 15 in the following way. First write
down the symbol S as the first line of the derivation. We interpret the first rule
of 14 as permitting S to be replaced by NP VP, giving the second line of 15.
Interpreting the second rule of 14 in a similar way, we form the third line of
the derivation 15 with VP replaced by V NP. We form the fourth line of 15
by applying the rule NP → N of 14, interpreted the same way, to both of the
occurrences of NP in the third line. Finally, we form the final two lines of 15
by applying the rules N →  and V → .

126

Language and Mind

15

S
NP VP
NP V NP
NVN
V


Clearly, we can represent what is essential to the derivation 15 by the tree
diagram 16.
16

In the diagram 16, each symbol dominates the symbols by which it was replaced
in forming 15. In fact, we may think of the rules of 14 as simply describing the
way in which a tree diagram such as 16 can be constructed. Evidently, 16 is just
another notation for the labeled bracketing 17:
             
17
s np n n np vp v v np n n np vp s
Domination of some element by a symbol A in 16 (as, for example, V NP is
dominated by VP) is indicated in 17 by enclosing this element by the labeled
brackets [a,]a. If we have a lexicon which tells us that “John” and “Bill” can
replace the symbol  when this symbol is dominated by N (that is, is enclosed
by [n,]n), and that “saw” can replace  when it is dominated by V, then we
can extend the derivation 15 to derive “John saw Bill,” with the associated
structure that we have given as 6. In fact, 6, derives from 17 by replacing the
first occurrence of  by “John,” the second by “saw,” and the third by “Bill.”
Notice that the rules 14 in effect define grammatical relations, where the definitions are given as on pp. 121–22. Thus, the first rule of 14 defines the subject–
predicate relation and the second, the verb–object relation. Similarly, other
semantically significant grammatical functions and relations can be defined by
rules of this form, interpreted in the manner indicated.
Restating these notions in a more formal and general way, the categorial
component of the base is a system of rules of the form A → Z, where A is a
category symbol such as S (for “sentence”), NP (for “noun phrase”), N (for
“noun”), etc., and Z is a string of one or more symbols which may again be
category symbols or which may be terminal symbols (that is, symbols which
do not appear on the left-hand side of the arrow in any base rule). Given such

The formal nature of language

127

a system, we can form derivations, a derivation being a sequence of lines that
meets the following conditions: the first line is simply the symbol S (standing for
sentence); the last line contains only terminal symbols; if X, Y are two successive
lines, then X must be of the form . . . A . . . and Y of the form . . . Z . . . , where A →
Z is one of the rules. A derivation imposes a labeled bracketing on its terminal
string in the obvious way. Thus given the successive lines X = . . . A . . . ,
Y = . . . Z . . . , where Y was derived from X by the rule A → Z, we will
say that the string derived from Z (or Z itself, if it is terminal) is bracketed by
[a,]a. Equivalently, we can represent the labeled bracketing by a tree diagram
in which a node labeled A (in this example) dominates the successive nodes
labeled by the successive symbols of Z.
We assume that one of the terminal symbols of the categorial component is
the dummy symbol . Among the nonterminal symbols are several that stand
for lexical categories, in particular N (for “noun”), V (for “verb”), ADJ (for
“adjective”). A lexical category A can appear on the left-hand side of a rule
A → Z only if Z is . Lexical entries will then be inserted in derivations in
place of  by rules of a different sort, extending the derivations provided by the
categorial component. Aside from , indicating the position in which an item
from the lexicon may appear, the terminal symbols of the categorial component
are grammatical elements such as be, of, etc. Some of the terminal symbols
introduced by categorial rules will have an intrinsic semantic content.
A labeled bracketing generated by base rules (that is, by the phrase-structure
rules of the categorial component and by the rule of lexical insertion mentioned in the preceding paragraph) will be called a base phrase-marker. More
generally, we will use the term “phrase-marker” here to refer to any string of
elements properly bracketed with labeled brackets.26 The rules of the transformational component modify phrase-markers in certain fixed ways. These rules
are arranged in a sequence T1 , . . . , Tm . This sequence of rules applies to a
base phrase-marker in a cyclic fashion. First, it applies to a configuration dominated by S (that is, a configuration [s . . .]s) and containing no other occurrence
of S. When the transformational rules have applied to all such configurations,
then they next apply to a configuration dominated by S and containing only
S-dominated configurations to which the rules have already applied. This process continues until the rules apply to the full phrase-marker dominated by
the initial occurrence of S in the base phrase-marker. At this point, we have a
surface structure. It may be that the ordering conditions on transformations are
looser – that there are certain ordering conditions on the set {T1 , . . . , Tm }, and
that at a given stage in the cycle, a sequence of transformations can apply
if it does not violate these conditions – but I will not go into this matter
here.
26

It may be that a slightly more general notion of “phrase-marker” is needed, but we will put this
question aside here.

128

Language and Mind

The properties of the syntactic component can be made quite clear by an
example (which, naturally, must be much oversimplified). Consider a subpart
of English with the lexicon 18 and the categorial component 19.
Lexicon: it, fact, John, Bill, boy,
(Noun)
18
future
dream, see, persuade,
(Verb)
annoy
sad
(Adjective)
will
(Modal)
the
(Determiner)
S → (Q) NP AUX VP
VP → be ADJ
VP → V (NP) (of NP)
NP → (DET) N (that S)
AUX → past
AUX → M
N, V, ADJ, DET, M → 
In 19, parentheses are used to indicate an element that may or may not be
present in the rule. Thus the first line of 19 is an abbreviation for two rules,
one in which S is rewritten Q NP AUX VP, the other in which S is rewritten NP
AUX VP. Similarly, the third line of 19 is actually an abbreviation for four rules,
etc. The last line of 19 stands for five rules, each of which rewrites one of the
categorial symbols on the left as the dummy terminal symbol .
This categorial component provides such derivations as the following:
19

20

a. S
NP AUX VP
NP AUX be ADJ
N AUX be ADJ
N past be ADJ
 past be 
b. S
NP AUX VP
NP AUX V NP of NP
DET N AUX V N of DET N that S
DET N M V N of DET N that S

 of   that S

 of   that NP VP

 of   that NP AUX V

 of   that N AUX V

 of   that N past V

 of   that  past 

The formal nature of language

129

These derivations are constructed in the manner just described. They impose
labeled bracketings which, for clarity, we will give in the equivalent tree
representation:
21

a.

b.

We now use the lexicon to complete the base derivations 20a, 20b. Each entry
in the lexicon contains syntactic features which identify the occurrences of 
that it can replace in a derivation. For example, the items of the five rows of 18
can replace occurrences of  that are dominated, in the tree representations of
21, by the categorial symbols N, V, ADJ, M, DET, respectively.
But the restrictions are much narrower than this. Thus of the verbs in 18
(line 2), only persuade can replace an occurrence of  dominated by V when this
occurrence of V is followed in the VP by: NP of NP. We can form “. . . persuade
John of the fact,” but not “. . . dream (see, annoy) John of the fact.” Similarly,
of the nouns in 18 (first line) only fact can appear in the context DET – that S
(that is, “the fact that John left”); only it in a NP of the form – that S;27 only
fact, boy, and future in a NP of the form DET – ( “the fact,” “the boy,” “the
future”), etc. Details aside, the general character of such restrictions is quite
clear. Assuming, then, that the lexical entries contain the appropriate lexical
features, we can extend the base derivations of 20 to give the terminal strings
22, inserting the items enclosed in brackets in 21.
22

27

a. John past be sad
b. the boy will persuade John of the fact that Bill past dream
This may not seem obvious. We return to the example directly.

130

Language and Mind

We can also form such terminal strings as 23, with other choices in derivations.
23

Q the boy will dream of the future
it that John past see Bill past annoy the boy
John will be sad
John past see the future

In this way, we form full base derivations, using the rules of the categorial
component and then substituting lexical entries for particular occurrences of
the dummy symbol  in accordance with the syntactic features of these lexical
entries. Correspondingly, we have the labeled brackets represented as 21, with
lexical entries substituted for occurrences of  in the permitted ways. These
are the base phrase-markers.
Notice that the rules that introduce lexical entries into base phrase-markers
are entirely different in character from the rules of the categorial component. The
rules of 19 that were used to form 20 are of a very elementary sort. Each such rule
allows a certain symbol A in the string . . . A . . . to be rewritten as a certain string
Z, independently of the context of A and the source of A in the derivation. But
in introducing lexical entries in place of , we must consider selected aspects
of the phrase-marker in which  appears. For example, an occurrence of  can
be replaced by “John” if it is dominated in the phrase-marker by N, but not by
V. Thus the rules of lexical insertion really apply not to strings of categorial and
terminal symbols, as do the rules of the categorial component, but to phrasemarkers such as 21. Rules which apply to phrase-markers, modifying them
in some specific way, are referred to in current terminology as (grammatical)
transformations. Thus the rules of lexical insertion are transformational rules,
whereas the rules of the categorial component are simply rewriting rules.
Let us now return to the examples 22a, 22b. Consider first 22a, with the
base phrase-marker 21a.28 We see at once that 21 contains just the information
required in the deep structure of the sentence “John was sad.” Clearly, the
string past be is simply a representation of the formative “was,” just as past
see represents “saw,” past persuade represents “persuaded,” etc. With a rule
that converts past be to the formative “was,” we form the surface structure of
the sentence “John was sad.” Furthermore, if we define grammatical functions
and relations in the manner described earlier (see pp. 121–22), 21 expresses the
fact that the subject–predicate relation holds between John and past be sad, and
it also contains semantic information about the meaning-bearing items John,
past, sad; we may assume, in fact, that past is itself a symbol of a universal
terminal alphabet with a fixed semantic interpretation, and the semantic features
of the lexical entries of John and sad can also be assumed to be selected,
like the phonological features of these entries, from some universal system of
28

We henceforth suppose 21a and 21b to be extended to full phrase-markers by insertion of
appropriate lexical entries, as indicated.

The formal nature of language

131

representation of the sort discussed above. In short, 21a contains all information
required for semantic interpretation, and we can, therefore, take it to be the deep
structure underlying the sentence “John was sad.”
What is true of this example is true quite generally. That is, the base phrasemarkers generated by the categorial component and the lexicon are the deep
structures that determine semantic interpretation. In this simple case, only one
rule is needed to convert the deep structure to a surface structure, namely, the
rule converting past be to the formative was. Since this rule is clearly a special
case of a rule that applies as well to any string of the form past V, it is really
a very simple transformational rule (in the terminology just given) rather than
an elementary rule of the type that we find in the categorial component. This
observation can be generalized. The rules that convert deep structures to surface
structures are transformational rules.
Suppose now that instead of the derivation 20a we had formed the very similar
derivation 20:
24

S
Q NP AUX VP
Q NP AUX be ADJ
Q N AUX be ADJ
Q N M be ADJ
Q   be 
Q John will be sad

with its associated phrase-marker. We intend the symbol Q to be a symbol of
the universal terminal alphabet with a fixed semantic interpretation, namely,
that the associated sentence is a question. Suppose that the transformational
component of the syntax contains rules that convert phrase-markers of the form
Q NP AUX . . . to corresponding phrase-markers of the form AUX NP . . . (that
is, the transformation replaces Q by AUX, leaving the phrase-marker otherwise
unchanged). Applied to the phrase-marker corresponding to 24, this rule gives
the labeled bracketing of the sentence “Will John be sad?”; that is, it forms the
surface structure for this sentence.
Suppose that in place of 24 we had used the rule rewriting AUX as past. The
question transformation of the preceding paragraph would give a phrase-marker
with the terminal string “past John be sad,” just as it gives “Will John be sad?”
in the case of 24. Evidently, we must modify the question transformation so
that it inverts not just past, in this case, but the string past be, so that we derive
finally, “Was John sad?” This modification is, in fact, straightforward, when the
rules are appropriately formulated.
Whether we select M or past in 24, the generated base phrase-marker once
again qualifies as a deep structure. The grammatical relation of John to will
(past) be sad is exactly the same in 24 as in 20a, with the definitions proposed
previously, as required for empirical adequacy. Of course, the surface forms

132

Language and Mind

do not express these grammatical relations, directly; as we have seen earlier,
significant grammatical relations are rarely expressed directly in the surface
structure.
Let us now turn to the more complex example 20b – 21b – 22b. Once again,
the base phrase-marker 21b of 22b expresses the information required for the
semantic interpretation of the sentence “The boy will persuade John of the
fact that Bill dreamt,” which derives from 22b by a transformational rule that
forms “dreamt” from past dream. Therefore, 21b can serve as the deep structure
underlying this sentence, exactly as 21a can serve for “John was sad,” and the
phrase-marker corresponding to 24 for “Will John be sad?”
Suppose that in rewriting NP in the third line of 20b, we had selected not
DET N that S but N that S [see the fourth line of 19]. The only lexical item
of 18 that can appear in the position of this occurrence of N is it. Therefore,
instead of 22b, we would have derived
25

the boy will persuade John of it that Bill past dream,

with grammatical relations and lexical content otherwise unmodified. Suppose
now that the transformational component of the syntax contains rules with the
following effect:
26

a. it is deleted before that S
b. of is deleted before that S

Applying 26a and 26b to 25 in that order, with the rule that converts past dream
to “dreamt,” we derive the surface structure of “The boy will persuade John that
Bill dreamt.” The base phrase-marker corresponding to 25 serves as the deep
structure underlying this sentence.
Notice that the rule 26a is much more general. Thus suppose we select the
NP it that Bill past dream as the subject of past annoy John, as is permitted by
the rules 18, 19. This gives
27

it that Bill past dream past annoy John

Applying the rule 26a (and the rules for forming past tense of verbs), we derive,
“That Bill dreamt annoyed John.” Alternatively, we might have applied the
transformational rule with the effect of 28:
28

A phrase-marker of the form it that S X is restructured as the corresponding phrase-marker of the form it X that S.

Applying 28 to 27, we derive “It annoyed John that Bill dreamt.” In this case, 26a
is inapplicable. Thus 27 underlies two surface structures, one determined by 28
and the other by 26a; having the same deep structure, these are synonymous. In
the case of 25, 28 is inapplicable and, therefore, we have only one corresponding
surface structure.
We can carry the example 25 further by considering additional transformational rules. Suppose that instead of selecting Bill in the embedded sentence of

The formal nature of language

133

25, we had selected John a second time. There is a very general transformational
rule in English and other languages providing for the deletion of repeated items.
Applying this rule along with other minor ones of an obvious sort, we derive
29

The boy will persuade John to dream

from a deep structure that contains, as it must, a subphrase-marker that expresses
the fact that John is the subject of dream. Actually, in this case the deep phrasemarker would be slightly different, in ways that need not concern us here, in
this rough expository sketch.
Suppose now that we were to add a transformation that converts a phrasemarker of the form NP AUX V NP into the corresponding passive, in the obvious
way.29 Applying to phrase-markers very much like 21b, this rule would provide
surface structures for the sentences “John will be persuaded that Bill dreamt (by
the boy)” [from 25] and “John will be persuaded to dream (by the boy)” [from
29]. In each case, the semantic interpretation will be that of the underlying
deep phrase-marker. In certain cases, the significant grammatical relations are
entirely obscured in the surface structure. Thus in the case of the sentence
“John will be persuaded to dream,” the fact that “John” is actually the subject
of “dream” is not indicated in the surface structure, although the underlying
deep structure, as we have noted, expresses this fact directly.
From these examples we can see how a sequence of transformations can
form quite complicated sentences in which significant relations among the parts
are not represented in any direct way. In fact, it is only in artificially simple
examples that deep and surface structure correspond closely. In the normal
sentences of everyday life, the relation is much more complex; long sequences
of transformations apply to convert underlying deep structures into the surface
form.
The examples that we have been using are stilted and unnatural. With a less
rudimentary grammar, quite natural ones can be provided. For example, in place
of the sentences formed from 27 by 26 or 28 we could use more acceptable
sentences such as “That you should believe this is not surprising,” “It is not
surprising that you should believe this,” etc. Actually, the unnaturalness of the
examples we have used illustrates a simple but often neglected point, namely,
that the intrinsic meaning of a sentence and its other grammatical properties are
determined by rule, not by conditions of use, linguistic context, frequency of
parts, etc.30 Thus the examples of the last few paragraphs may never have been
29
30

Notice that this transformation would modify the phrase-marker to which it applies in a more
radical way than those discussed above. The principles remain the same, however.
These factors may affect performance, however. Thus they may affect the physical signal and
play a role in determining how a person will interpret sentences. In both producing and understanding sentences, the speaker–hearer makes use of the ideal phonetic and semantic interpretations, but other factors also play a role. The speaker may be simply interested in making himself
understood–the hearer, in determining what the speaker intended (which may not be identical

134

Language and Mind

produced in the experience of some speaker (or, for that matter, in the history
of the language), but their status as English sentences and their ideal phonetic
and semantic interpretations are unaffected by this fact.
Since the sequence of transformations can effect drastic modifications in a
phrase-marker, we should not be surprised to discover that a single structure31
may result from two very different deep structures – that is, that certain sentences are ambiguous (for example, sentence 4 on p. 110). Ambiguous sentences
provide a particularly clear indication of the inadequacy of surface structure as
a representation of deeper relations.32
More generally, we can easily find paired sentences with essentially the same
surface structure but entirely different grammatical relations. To mention just
one such example, compare the sentences of 30:
30

a. I persuaded the doctor to examine John.
b. I expected the doctor to examine John.

The surface structures are essentially the same. The sentence 30a is of the same
form as 29. It derives from a deep structure which is roughly of the form 31:
31

31
32

I past persuade the doctor of it that the doctor AUX examine John

with the literal semantic interpretation of the sentence or sentence fragment that he produced).
Once again, we must insist on the necessity for distinguishing performance from competence
if either is to be studied in a serious way.
More accurately, surface structures that are sufficiently close so as to determine the same
phonetic representation.
Modern linguistics has made occasional use of this property of language as a research tool.
The first general discussion of how ambiguity can be used to illustrate the inadequacy of
certain conceptions of syntactic structure is in C. F. Hockett’s “Two Models for Grammatical
Description,” Word, Vol. 10, 1954, pp. 210–31, reprinted in M. Joos, ed., Readings in Linguistics
One, 4th edn. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966).

The formal nature of language

135

This deep structure is essentially the same as 21b, and by the transformational
process described in connection with 29, we derive from it the sentence 30a.
But in the case of 30b there are no such related structures as “I expected the
doctor of the fact that he examined John,” “. . . of the necessity (for him) to
examine John,” etc., as there are in the case of 30a. Correspondingly, there is no
justification for an analysis of 30b as derived from a structure like 31. Rather,
the deep structure underlying 30b will be something like 32 (again omitting
details):
32

I past expect it that the doctor AUX examine John

There are many other facts that support this analysis of 30a and 30b. For example, from a structure like 32 we can form “What I expected was that the doctor
(will, should, etc.) examine John,” by the same rule that forms “What I saw
was the book,” from the underlying NP-V-NP structure “I saw the book.” But
we cannot form “What I persuaded was that the doctor should examine John,”
corresponding to 30a, because the underlying structure 31 is not of the form
NP-V-NP as required by this transformation. Applying rule 26a to 32, we derive
“I expected that the doctor (will, should, etc.) examine John.” We derive 30b,
instead, by the use of the same rule that gives 29, with “to” rather than “that”
appearing with the embedded sentence, which, in this case, contains no other
representative of the category AUX.
Details aside, we see that 30a is derived from 31 and 30b from 32, so that
despite near identity of surface structure, the deep structures underlying 30a and
30b are very different. That there must be such a divergence in deep structure
is not at all obvious.33 It becomes clear, however, if we consider the effect of
replacing “the doctor to examine John” by its passive, “John to be examined by
the doctor,” in 30a and 30b. Thus we have under examination the sentences 33
and 34:
33

It seems, in fact, that this phenomenon has escaped the attention of English grammarians, both
traditional and modern.

136

Language and Mind

33

a. I persuaded the doctor to examine John [= 30a].
b. I persuaded John to be examined by the doctor.

34

a. I expected the doctor to examine John [= 30b].
b. I expected John to be examined by the doctor.

The semantic relation between the paired sentences of 34 is entirely different
from the relation between the sentences of 33. We can see this by considering the
relation in truth value. Thus 34a and 34b are necessarily the same in truth value;
if I expected the doctor to examine John then I expected John to be examined
by the doctor, and conversely. But there is no necessary relation in truth value
between 33a and 33b. If I persuaded the doctor to examine John, it does not
follow that I persuaded John to be examined by the doctor, or conversely.
In fact, exchange of active and passive in the embedded sentence preserves
meaning, in a rather clear sense, in the case of 30b but not 30a. The explanation is
immediate from consideration of the deep structures underlying these sentences.
Replacing active by passive in 32, we then go on to derive 34b in just the way
that 30b is derived from 32. But to derive 33b, we must not only passivize the
embedded sentence in 31, but we must also select “John” instead of “the doctor”
as the object of the verb “persuade”; otherwise, the conditions for deletion of the
repeated noun phrase, as in the derivation of 29, will not be met. Consequently,
the deep structure underlying 33b is quite different from that underlying 33a. Not
only is the embedded sentence passivized, but the object “the doctor” must be
replaced in 31 by “John.” The grammatical relations are, consequently, quite
different, and the semantic interpretation differs correspondingly. It remains
true, in both cases, that passivization does not affect meaning (in the sense of
“meaning” relevant here). The change of meaning in 30a when “the doctor to
examine John” is replaced by “John to be examined by the doctor” is occasioned
by the change of grammatical relations, “John” now being the direct object of
the verb phrase in the underlying structure rather than “the doctor.” There is no
corresponding change in the case of 34a, so that the meaning remains unaltered
when the embedded sentence is passivized.
The example 30a, 30b illustrates, once again, the inadequacy (and, quite
generally, irrelevance) of surface structure for the representation of semantically significant grammatical relations. The labeled bracketing that conveys
the information required for phonetic interpretation is in general very different
from the labeled bracketing that provides the information required for semantic
interpretation. The examples 30a, 30b also illustrate how difficult it may be to
bring one’s “linguistic intuition” to consciousness. As we have seen, the grammar of English, as a characterization of competence (see pp. 102f.), must, for
descriptive adequacy, assign different deep structures to the sentences 30a and
30b. The grammar that each speaker has internalized does distinguish these
deep structures, as we can see from the fact that any speaker of English is

The formal nature of language

137

capable of understanding the effect of replacing the embedded sentence by its
passive in the two cases of 30. But this fact about his internalized grammatical
competence may escape even the careful attention of the native speaker (see
note 33).
Perhaps such examples as these suffice to give something of the flavor of
the syntactic structure of a language. Summarizing our observations about the
syntactic component, we conclude that it contains a base and a transformational
part. The base generates deep structures, and the transformational rules convert them to surface structures. The categorial component of the base defines
the significant grammatical relations of the language, assigns an ideal order
to underlying phrases, and, in various ways, determines which transformations will apply.34 The lexicon specifies idiosyncratic properties of individual
lexical items. Together, these two components of the base seem to provide
the information relevant for semantic interpretation in the sense in which we
have been using this term, subject to the qualifications mentioned earlier. The
transformational rules convert phrase-markers to new phrase-markers, affecting
various kinds of reordering and reorganization. The kinds of changes that can
be effected are quite limited; we will, however, not go into this matter here.
Applying in sequence, the transformations may affect the organization of a
base phrase-marker quite radically, however. Thus the transformations provide
a wide variety of surface structures that have no direct or simple relation to
the base structures from which they originate and which express their semantic
content.
It is a fact of some significance that the mapping of deep to surface structures
is not a matter of a single step but is, rather, analyzable into a sequence of
successive transformational steps. The transformations that contribute to this
mapping of deep to surface structures can be combined in many different ways,
depending on the form of the deep structure to which they apply. Since these
transformations apply in sequence, each must produce a structure of the sort
to which the next can apply. This condition is met in our formulation, since
transformations apply to phrase-markers and convert them into new phrasemarkers. But there is very good empirical evidence that the surface structures
that determine phonetic form are, in fact, phrase-markers (that is, labeled bracketing of formatives). It follows, then, that the deep structures to which transformations originally apply should themselves be phrase-markers, as in our
formulation.
In principle, there are many ways in which a network of grammatical relations
might be represented. One of the major reasons for selecting the method of
phrase-markers generated by base rules is precisely the fact that transformations
must apply in sequence and therefore must apply to objects of the sort that they
34

It is an open question whether this determination is unique.

138

Language and Mind

themselves produce, ultimately, to phrase-markers that have the same formal
properties as surface structures.35
Concluding observations
The grammatical theory just presented calls for several comments. We pointed
out earlier that the grammar of a language must, for empirical adequacy, allow
for infinite use of finite means, and we assigned this recursive property to the
syntactic component, which generates an infinite set of paired deep and surface
structures. We have now further localized the recursive property of the grammar,
assigning it to the categorial component of the base. Certain base rules introduce
the initial symbol S that heads derivations, for example, the fourth rule of 19.
It may be that introduction of “propositional content” in deep structures by
this means is the only recursive device in the grammar apart from the rules
involved in forming coordinated constructions, which raise various problems
going beyond what we have been discussing here.
It is reasonable to ask why human languages should have a design of this
sort – why, in particular, they should use grammatical transformations of the
sort described to convert deep structures to surface form. Why should they
not make use of deep structures in a more direct way?36 Two reasons suggest
themselves at once. We have already observed that the conditions of lexical
insertion are essentially transformational rather than phrase-structural (see p.
130). More generally, we find many nonphrase-structural constraints (for example, those involved in deletion of identical items – see pp. 132 and 136) when
we study a language carefully. Thus transformations not only convert a deep
structure to a surface structure, but they also have a “filtering effect,” ruling
out certain potential deep structures as not well-formed.37 Apart from this, we
would naturally be inclined to seek an explanation for the use of grammatical
transformations in the empirical constraints that linguistic communication must
meet. Even the simple fact that sound is unrecoverable imposes conditions on
speech that need not, for example, be imposed on a linguistic system designed
only for writing (for example, the artificial systems mentioned in note 36).
A written system provides an “external memory” that changes the perceptual
problem in quite a significant way. We would expect a system designed for the
35

36

37

There are other supporting reasons. For one thing, grammatical relations are not among words
or morphemes but among phrases, in general. For another, empirical investigation has uniformly
shown that there is an optimal ideal order of phrases in underlying structures, consistent with
the assumption that these are generated by a base system of the sort discussed above.
It is interesting to observe, in this connection, that the theory of context-free phrase-structure
grammar (see p. 125) is very close to adequate for “artificial languages” invented for various
purposes, for example, for mathematics or logic or as computer languages.
And hence, in certain cases, as underlying “semigrammatical sentences” that deviate, in the
indicated way, from grammatical rule. This suggests one approach to the problem touched on
in note 24.

The formal nature of language

139

conditions of speech communication to be somehow adapted to the load on
memory. In fact, grammatical transformations characteristically reduce the
amount of grammatical structure in phrase-markers in a well-defined way, and
it may be that one consequence of this is to facilitate the problem of speech
perception by a short-term memory of a rather limited sort.38 This observation
suggests some promising directions for further research, but little of substance
can be said with any confidence on the basis of what is understood today.
One further point requires some clarification. We noted at the outset that performance and competence must be sharply distinguished if either is to be studied
successfully. We have now discussed a certain model of competence. It would
be tempting, but quite absurd, to regard it as a model of performance as well.
Thus we might propose that to produce a sentence, the speaker goes through the
successive steps of constructing a base-derivation, line by line from the initial
symbol S, then inserting lexical items and applying grammatical transformations to form a surface structure, and finally applying the phonological rules
in their given order, in accordance with the cyclic principle discussed earlier.
There is not the slightest justification for any such assumption. In fact, in implying that the speaker selects the general properties of sentence structure before
selecting lexical items (before deciding what he is going to talk about), such a
proposal seems not only without justification but entirely counter to whatever
vague intuitions one may have about the processes that underlie production. A
theory of performance (production or perception) will have to incorporate the
theory of competence – the generative grammar of a language – as an essential
part. But models of performance can be constructed in many different ways,
consistently with fixed assumptions about the competence on which they are
based. There is much that can be said about this topic, but it goes beyond the
bounds of this paper.
Specifying the properties of the various components and subcomponents of
a grammar precisely, along the lines outlined in this discussion, we formulate a
highly restrictive hypothesis about the structure of any human language. As we
have remarked several times, it is far from necessary, on any a priori grounds, that
a language must have a structure of this sort. Furthermore, it seems quite likely
that very heavy conditions can be placed on grammars beyond those outlined
above. For example, it may be (as, in fact, was traditionally assumed) that
base structures can vary only very slightly from language to language; and, by
sufficiently restricting the possible range of base structures, it may be possible to
arrive at quite general definitions for the categories that function as “nonterminal
symbols” in the rules of the categorial component. As observed previously, this
38

For some speculations about this matter and discussion of the general problem, see G. A. Miller
and N. Chomsky, “Finitary Models for the User,” in R. D. Luce, E. Galanter, and R. Bush, eds.,
Handbook of Mathematical Psychology (New York: Wiley, 1963), Vol. II. The suggestion that
transformations may facilitate performance is implicit in V. Yngve, “A Model and a Hypothesis
for Language Structure,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 1960, pp. 444–66.

140

Language and Mind

would provide language-independent definitions of grammatical relations, and
would raise the possibility that there exist deep-seated universal principles of
semantic interpretation.
In mentioning such possibilities, we must take note of the widespread view
that modern investigations have not only conclusively refuted the principles of
traditional universal grammar but have, moreover, shown that the search for
such principles was ill-conceived from the start. But it seems to me that such
conclusions are based on a serious misunderstanding of traditional universal
grammar, and on an erroneous interpretation of the results of modern work.
Traditional universal grammar tried to demonstrate, on the basis of what information was then available, that deep structures vary little from language to
language. That surface structures might be highly diverse was never doubted.
It was also assumed that the categories of syntax, semantics, and phonetics are
universal and quite restricted in variety. Actually, modern “anthropological linguistics” has provided little evidence that bears on the assumption of uniformity
of deep structures, and insofar as the universality of categories is concerned,
conclusions rather like the traditional ones are commonly accepted in practice
in descriptive work.39
Modern linguistics and anthropological linguistics have concerned themselves only marginally with deep structure, either in theory or practice. A great
diversity of surface structures has been revealed in descriptive work, as anticipated in traditional universal grammar. Nevertheless, a good case can be made
for the conclusion that the fundamental error of traditional universal grammar
was that it was not sufficiently restrictive in the universal conditions it proposed for human language – that much heavier constraints must be postulated
to account for the empirical facts.
Our discussion of the structure of English in the illustrative examples given
previously has necessarily been quite superficial and limited to very simple
phenomena. But even a discussion of the topics we have touched on requires
a fairly intimate knowledge of the language and a reasonably well-articulated
theory of generative grammar. Correspondingly, it is only when problems of
the sort illustrated are seriously studied that any contribution can be made
to the theory of universal grammar. Under these circumstances, it is not too
surprising that even today, the hypotheses of universal grammar that can be
formulated with any conviction are supported by evidence from a fairly small
number of studies of very few of the languages of the world, and that they
must therefore be highly tentative. Still, the inadequacy of the evidence should
not be overstated. Thus it is surely true – and there is nothing paradoxical
39

Traditional theories of universal phonetics have been largely accepted as a basis for modern
work, and have been refined and amplified in quite important ways. See the references in
note 7.

The formal nature of language

141

in this – that a single language can provide strong evidence for conclusions
regarding universal grammar. This becomes quite apparent when we consider
again the problem of language acquisition (see p. 106). The child must acquire
a generative grammar of his language on the basis of a fairly restricted amount
of evidence.40 To account for this achievement, we must postulate a sufficiently
rich internal structure – a sufficiently restricted theory of universal grammar
that constitutes his contribution to language acquisition.
For example, it was suggested earlier that in order to account for the perception of stress contours in English, we must suppose that the user of the language
is making use of the principle of cyclic application. We also noted that he could
hardly have sufficient evidence for this principle. Consequently, it seems reasonable to assume that this principle is simply part of the innate schematism that he
uses to interpret the limited and fragmentary evidence available to him. It is, in
other words, part of universal grammar. Similarly, it is difficult to imagine what
“inductive principles” might lead the child unerringly to the assumptions about
deep structure and about organization of grammar that seem to be necessary if
we are to account for such facts as those we have mentioned. Nor is a search for
such principles particularly well-motivated. It seems reasonable to assume that
these properties of English are, in reality, facts of universal grammar. If such
properties are available to the child, the task of language acquisition becomes
feasible. The problem for the child is not the apparently insuperable inductive feat of arriving at a transformational generative grammar from restricted
data, but rather that of discovering which of the possible languages he is being
exposed to. Arguing in this way, we can arrive at conclusions about universal
grammar from study of even a single language.
The child is presented with data, and he must inspect hypotheses (grammars)
of a fairly restricted class to determine compatibility with these data. Having
selected a grammar of the predetermined class, he will then have command of
the language generated by this grammar.41 Thus he will know a great deal about
40

41

Furthermore, evidence of a highly degraded sort. For example, the child’s conclusions about
the rules of sentence formation must be based on evidence that consists, to a large extent, of
utterances that break rules, since a good deal of normal speech consists of false starts, disconnected phrases, and other deviations from idealized competence.
The issue here is not one of “normative grammar.” The point is that a person’s normal speech
departs from the rules of his own internalized grammar in innumerable ways, because of the
many factors that interact with underlying competence to determine performance. Correspondingly, as a language learner, he acquires a grammar that characterizes much of the evidence on
which it was based as deviant and anomalous.
We are presenting an “instantaneous model” of language acquisition which is surely false in
detail, but can very well be accepted as a reasonable first approximation. This is not to deny
that the fine structure of learning deserves study. The question, rather, is what the range of
possibilities may be within which experience can cause knowledge and belief to vary. If the
range is quite narrow (as, it seems to me, is suggested by considerations of the sort mentioned
above), then a first approximation of the sort suggested will be a prerequisite to any fruitful

142

Language and Mind

phenomena to which he has never been exposed, and which are not “similar” or
“analogous” in any well-defined sense to those to which he has been exposed.42
He will, for example, know the relations among the sentences 33 and 34, despite
their novelty; he will know what stress contours to assign to utterances, despite
the novelty and lack of physical basis for these phonetic representations; and so
on, for innumerable other similar cases. This disparity between knowledge and
experience is perhaps the most striking fact about human language. To account
for it is the central problem of linguistic theory.
The basic conclusion that seems to be emerging with increasing clarity from
contemporary work in linguistics is that very restrictive initial assumptions
about the form of generative grammar must be imposed if explanations are to
be forthcoming for the facts of language use and language acquisition. Furthermore, there is, so far, no evidence to suggest that the variety of generative
grammars for human languages is very great. The theory of universal grammar
suggested by the sketchy description that we have just given will no doubt be
proven incorrect in various respects. But it is not unlikely that its fundamental defect will be that it permits far too much latitude for the construction of
grammars, and that the kinds of languages that can be acquired by humans in
the normal way are actually of a much more limited sort than this theory would
suggest. Yet even as the theory of generative grammar stands today, it imposes
fairly narrow conditions on the structure of human language. If this general
conclusion can be firmly established – and, furthermore, significantly strengthened – this will be a highly suggestive contribution to theoretical psychology.
It is hardly open to controversy that today, as in the seventeenth century, the
central and critical problem for linguistics is to use empirical evidence from
particular languages to refine the principles of universal grammar. I have tried,
in this paper, to suggest some of the principles that seem well established and
to illustrate some of the empirical considerations that bear on such principles.43

42
43

investigation of learning. Given an instantaneous model that is empirically well supported, as a
first approximation, there are many questions that can immediately be raised: for example, what
are the strategies by which hypotheses are sampled, how does the set of hypotheses available
at one stage depend on those tested at earlier stages, etc.
Except, tautologically, in the sense that they are accounted for by the same theory.
In addition to works mentioned in earlier notes the following books can be consulted for further
development of topics touched on in this paper: N. Chomsky, Syntactic Structures (The Hague:
Mouton, 1957); N. Chomsky, Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1965); M. Halle, Sound Pattern of Russian (The Hague: Mouton, 1959); J. Katz and P. Postal,
An Integrated Theory of Linguistic Descriptions (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1964). See also
many papers in J. Fodor and J. Katz, eds., Structure of Language: Readings in the Philosophy
of Language (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964). For more information on aspects
of English structure touched on here, see also R. Lees, Grammar of English Nominalizations
(New York: Humanities Press, 1963), and P. Rosenbaum, “Grammar of English Predicate Complement Constructions,” unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, 1965. For further material see
the bibliographies of the works cited.

6

Linguistics and philosophy

The methods and concerns of linguists and philosophers are similar in so many
respects that it would be folly, I believe, to insist on a sharp separation of
these disciplines, or for either to maintain a parochial disregard for insights
achieved in the other. A number of examples might be cited to illustrate the
possibility of fruitful interchange between the two. Zeno Vendler, in his recent
book Linguistics and Philosophy, goes so far as to maintain that “the science of
structural linguistics” provides “a new technique” for analytic philosophy, one
that “is nothing but the natural continuation of the line of development that goes
through the philosophers of ordinary language to J. L. Austin.” For reasons to
which I will return in a moment, I am a bit skeptical about the contribution
that linguistics might make to philosophy along the lines that he sketches, but
I think that he has shown that certain concepts of linguistics can be used in
a rewarding way in the investigation of problems that have arisen in analytic
philosophy.
Conversely, as the attention of linguists begins to turn to problems of meaning
and use, there is no question that they can learn much from the long tradition
of philosophical investigation of such problems, although here too, I think, a
note of skepticism is in order.
To facilitate the discussion of this and other topics, let me present a small
illustration of a problem that is at the frontier of research today. In the descriptive
study of any language a central problem is to formulate a set of rules that generate
what we may call the “surface structures” of utterances. By the term “surface
structure,” I refer to the analysis of an utterance into a hierarchy of phrases,
each belonging to a specific category. This hierarchy can be represented as a
labeled bracketing of the utterance, in an obvious sense. For example, consider
the two sentences:
1
2

John is certain that Bill will leave.
John is certain to leave.

The surface structures of these utterances can be represented, in a natural way,
with the following labeled bracketing:
143

144

1

Language and Mind

 


S NP
S

2

that

John



 
S NP

NP


VP

Bill

John

is



VP


VP


AP

certain

will leave

is


AP



certain


VP

to leave



Paired brackets bound phrases; the label assigned to a pair of brackets indicates the category of the bounded phrase. Thus in 1, “certain that Bill will
leave” is a phrase of the category Adjective Phrase; in both 1 and 2, “John”
is a phrase of the category Noun Phrase; “will leave” is a Verb Phrase in 1;
and both 1 and 2 are phrases of the category Sentence. One may question the
details of these particular analyses, but there is little doubt that at some level
of description, these, or representations very much like them, constitute a significant aspect of the structure of the sentences 1 and 2, and, more generally,
that every sentence of the language has a surface structure of roughly this sort.
There is, for example, strong evidence that the perceived phonetic form of the
utterance is determined, by phonological rules of considerable generality, from
representations of essentially this sort.
Granting this much, the linguist studying English will try to formulate a set
of rules that generate an infinite number of surface structures, one for each
sentence of English. Correspondingly, linguistic theory will be concerned with
the problem of how such structures are generated in any human language, and
will try to formulate general principles governing the systems of rules that
express the facts of one or another such language.
Given the evidence available to us today, it seems to me reasonable to propose
that in every human language surface structures are generated from structures
of a more abstract sort, which I will refer to as “deep structures,” by certain
formal operations of a very special kind generally called “grammatical transformations.” Each transformation is a mapping of labeled bracketings onto labeled
bracketings. Deep structures are themselves labeled bracketings. The infinite
class of deep structures is specified by a set of “base rules.” Transformations
applied in sequence to deep structures in accordance with certain fixed conventions and principles ultimately generate the surface structures of the sentences
of the language. Thus a set of base rules defining an infinite class of deep structures and a set of grammatical transformations can serve to generate the surface
structures.
To illustrate, consider sentences 1 and 2 again. The underlying deep structures
might be represented roughly in the form 1 , 2 :
1
2

same as 1
    John 
S NP S NP

VP

to leave


VP

is


AP

certain



We may think of these deep structures as expressing the fact that in 1, we predicate of John that he is certain that Bill will leave, whereas in 2, which is rather

Linguistics and philosophy

145

similar to 1 in surface structure, we predicate of the proposition that John leaves,
that it is certain, in a very different sense of “certain.” There is no difficulty
in defining the concepts Subject and Predicate, in terms of configurations in
deep structures, so that they express the intended interpretation. The operations
that derive 2 from 2 include an operation of “extraposition,” which from a
structure very much like 2 would yield the structure 3, and an operation of
“it-replacement” which derives 2 from a structure almost exactly like 3, but
with “to” in place of “will” and “that” deleted:
  it  is  certain 
3
S NP
VP AP
 that  John  will leave 
S

NP

VP

Details aside, the theory of “transformational-generative grammar” maintains
that all surface structures are formed by application of such transformations –
each of which maps labeled bracketings onto labeled bracketings – from deep
structures that are often quite abstract. The sentences 1 and 2 are similar in
surface structure, but very different in deep structure; the sentences 2 and 3 are
very similar in deep structure, but quite different in surface structure. The deep
structures of the language are quite restricted in their variety, and it appears that
there are universal conditions that sharply restrict the class of possible rules.
Consider now the matter of semantic interpretation. It is clear from these
quite typical examples that the surface structures give little indication of the
semantic interpretation, whereas the deep structures are quite revealing in this
respect. Pursuing this line of reasoning, one might propose a further elaboration
of the theory just outlined, in the following terms. Let us suppose that there is
a system of “universal semantics” that specifies the class of possible semantic
representations for a natural language much in the way that universal phonetics
specifies the class of possible phonetic representations, by specifying a class of
distinctive features and certain conditions on their combination. Observe that
it would be perfectly reasonable to study universal semantics even without any
clear idea as to what its constituent elements might be, just as one could draw
fairly persuasive conclusions regarding universal phonetics from consideration
of the slow growth of the number of distinct sentences with increasing length,
the phenomena of rhyme and assonance, the lack of slow drift through the
“space” of sentences under chains of repetition, etc., even without any conception of what the distinctive features of this system might be. In any event, still
supposing this to be a reasonable approach, one might propose that a language
contains rules associating deep structures with representations drawn from universal semantics, as it contains phonological rules relating surface structures to
representations drawn from universal phonetics.
At this point in the development of such a theory, the linguist would do
well to turn to work in analytic philosophy, particularly to the many studies of referential opacity. One essential empirical assumption in the preceding

146

Language and Mind

account is that surface structure cannot contribute to meaning; whatever contribution the expression P makes to the meaning of the sentence XPY must be
determined by the deep structure underlying P. The investigation of referential
opacity has turned up a great number of examples illustrating how replacement
of one expression by another changes meaning, even when the semantic connection between the two is very close. The approach just outlined would have
to guarantee that in each such case there is a corresponding difference in deep
structure to which the difference in meaning can be attributed. Without pursuing the matter, I would simply note that the nature of these examples makes
it appear very unlikely that such an approach can succeed; but, in any event,
the study of this aspect of linguistic theory must certainly take into account
a mass of evidence that has been accumulated in the course of philosophical
investigation.
I have mentioned the possibility that insights developed in the course of
philosophical analysis might be relevant to the study of a central part of linguistic
theory, and that concepts of linguistics might be useful to the philosopher in
his work. Nevertheless, it seems to me that one should not expect too much
from an interchange of this sort, for a number of reasons. In the cases I have
mentioned, what is proposed is that the incidental by-products of research in
one field will be of use for the central concerns of another. Furthermore, it is
a fact that neither field makes use of research techniques of a sophisticated or
specialized nature. Thus one would expect that in each field, it would be quite
possible to collect and analyze the information relevant to its specific concerns
directly. It is, therefore, something of an accident when one field can build
directly on results of the other.
For these reasons, I think that Vendler may be expecting too much of the
method he suggests, namely, “an appeal to the facts of language already organized by the science of structural linguistics.” I believe that modern linguistics
has real achievements to its credit, and that some of these do have relevance to
philosophical questions. But it must be kept in mind that these achievements
owe little to modern science and less to modern technology. The gathering
of data is informal; there has been very little use of experimental approaches
(outside of phonetics) or of complex techniques of data collection and data
analysis of a sort that can easily be devised, and that are widely used in the
behavioral sciences. The arguments in favor of this informal procedure seem
to me quite compelling; basically, they turn on the realization that for the theoretical problems that seem most critical today, it is not at all difficult to obtain
a mass of crucial data without use of such techniques. Consequently, linguistic
work, at what I believe to be its best, lacks many of the features of the behavioral sciences. Nor is it obvious that the development of explanatory theories
in linguistics merits the honorific designation “scientific.” I think that these
intellectual constructions are nontrivial and often illuminating. However, apart

Linguistics and philosophy

147

from certain insights owed to modern logic and mathematics, there is no reason
why they could not have been developed many years ago. In fact, were it not for
the dominance of certain empiricist assumptions to which I will return directly,
I suspect that they would have been developed long before now and that much
of what is new and exciting in linguistics today would be taken for granted by
any educated person.
There are many questions about language that a philosopher might ask to
which linguistics provides no answer and no reasonable hope for an answer.
For example, a philosopher concerned with problems of knowledge, or causality
(to take an example of Vendler’s), might well be interested in investigating in
detail the properties of the words “know” and “cause.” Since linguistics offers
no privileged access to data of this sort, it would be merely a lucky accident
if acquaintance with linguistics proved to be of substantial help in this inquiry.
A linguistic form is not of importance to linguistics because of the intrinsic
interest of the concept or proposition it expresses (if any), but because of the
evidence it provides concerning some assumption about the nature of language.
Thus the analysis of sentences 1, 2, and 3 has been of interest to linguistics
because of the light it sheds on the nature of deep and surface structures and
the grammatical transformations that link them. Such data are of importance
to linguistics insofar as they can be explained on the basis of some interesting
assumptions about the organization of grammar, and are inconsistent with other
such assumptions. In themselves, these facts are of no more interest than the
fact that certain marks appear on a photographic plate at the base of a South
African mine shaft. The latter is critical for elementary particle theory for
the same reason that the facts related to sentences 1–3 are important for the
theory of language. Similar remarks can be made about the likelihood that the
conclusions of philosophers or the data they accumulate will be important for
linguistics.
To make the matter more concrete, consider again the examples 1–3. Conceivably, such sentences, and others like them, might be of some interest to a
philosopher concerned with the various concepts of certainty. These examples
are of interest to linguistics, at the moment, for entirely different reasons. Thus
it is interesting that there is a nominalized expression corresponding to 1, but
no nominalized expression corresponding to 2; 4 is a nominalized form of 1,
but we cannot form 5, corresponding to 2:
4
5

John’s certainty that Bill would leave
John’s certainty to leave

The distinction is more general; thus consider 6 and 7:
6
7

John is eager to leave.
John is easy to leave.

148

Language and Mind

Corresponding to 6, we have the nominal phrase 8; but we cannot form 9
corresponding to 7:
8
9

John’s eagerness to leave
John’s easiness to leave

Notice that sentence 6 is like 1 in that the deep structure is very close to the
surface structure; whereas 7 is like 2 in that the deep structure is very different
from the surface structure. In fact, the surface of 7 would be formed by operations much like those that form 2 from 2 and 3, by a derivation of roughly the
form 10:


10
a. S for one to leave John S is easy (analogous to 2 )


b. it is easy S for one to leave John S (analogous to 3)
c. John is easy to leave (=7, analogous to 2).
The generalization exemplified by 1, 2, 4–9 is that a nominal phrase can be
formed corresponding to a base structure but not to a surface structure. Thus
we have 4 corresponding to 1 and 8 corresponding to 6 (more properly, to the
deep structure underlying 6 as 1 underlies 1, but no nominalized expression
such as 5 and 9, corresponding to the surface structures 2 and 7. This general
observation can be illustrated by many other examples. It is interesting because
of the support it lends to the assumption that abstract deep structures of the sort
illustrated play a role in the mental representation of sentences. We find that
when we study English grammar on the basis of this and related assumptions,
we are able to characterize quite readily the class of sentences to which there
correspond nominal phrases of the sort under discussion. There is no natural
way to characterize this class in terms of surface structure, since, as we have
seen, sentences that are very similar in surface structure behave quite differently
with respect to the formal processes involved in the construction of nominal
expressions. We might go on to try to explain these facts at a deeper level by
formulating a principle of universal grammar from which it would follow that
the nominal phrases in question will correspond only to deep structures.
To summarize, the examples in question are important for the study of language because of the evidence that they provide in support of a particular
theory of linguistic structure, not because of the fact that the various concepts
of certainty are of interest in their own right. The philosopher concerned with
certainty would learn very little from a collection of data that is of great interest
for linguistic research.
Apart from accident or matters of personal history, linguistics will be of
relevance to philosophy only insofar as its conclusions about the nature of language bear on questions that concern the philosopher. One cannot predict to
what extent this will be true in the future; it might turn out, for example, that

Linguistics and philosophy

149

linguistic study of semantic and syntactic structure in the future will provide
a firm basis for certain kinds of philosophical investigation – one thinks, for
example, of the potential relevance of a systematic classification of verbs that
would have cross-language validity. For the moment, this is more a hope for
the future than a present reality, however. Still, I think that a case can be made
that certain well-founded conclusions about the nature of language do bear on
traditional philosophical questions, but in ways rather different from those just
mentioned. Specifically, I think that these conclusions are relevant to the problem of how knowledge is acquired and how the character of human knowledge
is determined by certain general properties of the mind. What I would like to
do, for the remainder of this paper, is to restate certain proposals about this
matter that have been developed elsewhere,1 and then to consider a variety of
problems and objections that have been raised by several philosophers with
respect to these proposals.2
One might adopt the following research strategy for the study of cognitive
processes in humans. A person is presented with a physical stimulus that he
interprets in a certain way. Let us say that he constructs a certain “percept”
that represents certain of his conclusions (unconscious, in general) about the
source of stimulation. To the extent that we can characterize this percept, we
can proceed to investigate the process of interpretation. We can, in other words,
proceed to develop a model of perception that takes stimuli as inputs and assigns
percepts as “outputs,” a model that will meet certain given empirical conditions
on the actual pairing of stimuli with interpretations of these stimuli. For example,
the person who understands sentences 1 and 2 knows (whether he is aware of
it or not) that in the case of 2 it is a proposition that is certain and in the case
of 1 it is a person who is certain of something, in a very different sense of
“certain.” If we are interested in studying perception of language – specifically,
the processes by which sentences are understood – we can begin by describing
the percepts in such a way as to bring out this difference, as we did in proposing
that 1 and 2 , interpreted in the suggested manner, are essential components
of the percept. We can then ask how these percepts are constructed by the hearer,
given the input stimuli 1 and 2.
A perceptual model that relates stimulus and percept might incorporate a certain system of beliefs, certain strategies that are used in interpreting stimuli, and
other factors – for example, organization of memory. In the case of language,
1
2

See, for example, my contribution to the symposium on innate ideas published in Synthese,
Vol. 17, No. 1, March 1967, pp. 2–11, and the references cited there on p. 11.
Specifically, the contributions by Nelson Goodman and Hilary Putnam to the symposium in
Synthese, Vol. 17, No. 1, March 1967, pp. 12–28, and the review articles by Henry Hiż and
Gilbert Harman in the issue of the Journal of Philosophy devoted to “Some Recent Issues in
Linguistics,” Vol. 64, No. 2, February 2, 1967, pp. 67–87. The latter two are largely devoted to
critical analysis of Chapter 1 of my Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1965).

150

Language and Mind

the technical term for the underlying system of beliefs is “grammar,” or “generative grammar.” A grammar is a system of rules that generates an infinite
class of “potential percepts,” each with its phonetic, semantic, and syntactic
aspects, the class of structures that constitute the language in question. The
percepts themselves are first-order constructs; we determine their properties
by experiment and observation. The grammar that underlies the formation of
percepts is a second-order construct. To study it, we must abstract away from
the other factors that are involved in the use and understanding of language,
and concentrate on the knowledge of language3 that has been internalized in
some manner by the language user.
Concentrating on this system, we can then inquire into the means by which it
was acquired and the basis for its acquisition. We can, in other words, attempt
to construct a second model, a learning model, which takes certain data as input
and gives, as “output,” the system of beliefs that is one part of the internal
structure of the perceptual model. The “output,” in this case, is represented in
the “final state” of the organism that has acquired this system of beliefs; we are
asking, then, how this final state was achieved, through the interplay of innate
factors, maturational processes, and organism–environment interaction.
In short, we can begin by asking “what is perceived” and move from there
to a study of perception. Focusing on the role of belief (in our case, knowledge
of language) in perception, we can try to characterize “what is learned” and
move from there to the study of learning. One might, of course, decide to study
some other topic, or to proceed in some different manner. Thus much of modern
psychology has decided, for reasons that do not impress me, to limit itself to
the study of behavior and control of behavior. I do not want to pursue the matter
here, but I will merely state my own opinion: that this approach has proven
quite barren, and that it is irrational to limit one’s objectives in this way. One
cannot hope to study learning or perception in any useful way by adhering to
methodological strictures that limit the conceptual apparatus so narrowly as to
disallow the concept “what is perceived” and the concept “what is learned.”
I think that interesting conclusions can be reached when one studies human
language along the lines just outlined. In the areas of syntax and phonetics at
least, a plausible general account can be given of the system of representation
for percepts in any human language. Furthermore, there has been substantial
progress in constructing generative grammars that express the knowledge of
language that is the “output” of a learning model and a fundamental component
of a perceptual model. There is, I believe, good evidence that a generative
grammar for a human language contains a system of base rules of a highly
restricted sort, a set of grammatical transformations that map the deep structures
3

Since the language has no objective existence apart from its mental representation, we need not
distinguish between “system of beliefs” and “knowledge,” in this case.

Linguistics and philosophy

151

formed in accordance with base rules onto surface structures, and a set of
phonological rules that assign phonetic interpretations, in a universal phonetic
alphabet, to surface structures. Furthermore, there is also good evidence that
certain highly restrictive principles determine the functioning of these rules,
conditions of ordering and organization of a complex and intricate sort. There
is a considerable literature dealing with these matters, and I will not try to review
it here. I only wish to emphasize that there is no a priori necessity for a language
to be organized in the highly specific manner proposed in these investigations.
Hence if this theory of linguistic structure is correct, or near correct, some
nontrivial problems arise for the theory of human learning. Specifically, we
must ask how, on the basis of the limited data available to him, the child is able
to construct a grammar of the sort that we are led to ascribe to him, with its
particular choice and arrangement of rules and with the restrictive principles of
application of such rules. What, in other words, must be the internal structure
of a learning model that can duplicate this achievement? Evidently, we must try
to characterize innate structure in such a way as to meet two kinds of empirical
conditions. First, we must attribute to the organism, as an innate property, a
structure rich enough to account for the fact that the postulated grammar is
acquired on the basis of the given conditions of access to data; second, we must
not attribute to the organism a structure so rich as to be incompatible with the
known diversity of languages. We cannot attribute knowledge of English to the
child as an innate property, because we know that he can learn Japanese as well
as English. We cannot attribute to him merely the ability to form associations,
or to apply the analytic procedures of structural linguistics, because (as is easy
to show when these proposals are made precise) the structures they yield are
not those that we must postulate as generative grammars. Within the empirical
bounds just stated, we are free to construct theories of innate structure and to
test them in terms of their empirical consequences. To say this is merely to
define the problem. Substantive questions arise only when a specific theory is
proposed.
By investigating sentences and their structural descriptions, speech signals
and the percepts to which they give rise, we can arrive at detailed conclusions
regarding the generative grammar that is one fundamental element in linguistic
performance, in speech and understanding of speech. Turning then to the next
higher level of abstraction, we raise the question of how this generative grammar
is acquired. From a formal point of view, the grammar that is internalized by
every normal human can be described as a theory of his language, a theory of
a highly intricate and abstract form that determines, ultimately, a connection
between sound and meaning by generating structural descriptions of sentences
(“potential percepts”), each with its phonetic, semantic, and syntactic aspects.
From this point of view, one can describe the child’s acquisition of knowledge
of language as a kind of theory construction. Presented with highly restricted

152

Language and Mind

data, he constructs a theory of the language of which this data is a sample (and,
in fact, a highly degenerate sample, in the sense that much of it must be excluded
as irrelevant and incorrect – thus the child learns rules of grammar that identify
much of what he has heard as ill-formed, inaccurate, and inappropriate). The
child’s ultimate knowledge of language obviously extends far beyond the data
presented to him. In other words, the theory he has in some way developed has
a predictive scope of which the data on which it is based constitute a negligible
part. The normal use of language characteristically involves new sentences,
sentences that bear no point-by-point resemblance or analogy to those in the
child’s experience. Furthermore, the task of constructing this system is carried
out in a remarkably similar way by all normal language learners, despite wide
differences in experience and ability. The theory of human learning must face
these facts.
I think that these facts suggest a theory of human intelligence that has a
distinctly rationalist flavor. Using terms suggested by Peirce, in his lectures
on “the logic of abduction,” the problem of the theory of learning is to state
the condition that “gives a rule to abduction and so puts a limit on admissible hypotheses.” If “man’s mind has a natural adaptation to imagining correct
theories of some kinds,” then acquisition of knowledge of a sort that we are
considering is possible. The problem for the psychologist (or linguist) is to
formulate the principles that set a limit to admissible hypotheses. I have made
detailed suggestions in this regard elsewhere, and will not repeat them here.
Roughly, I think it reasonable to postulate that the principles of general linguistics regarding the nature of rules, their organization, the principles by which
they function, the kinds of representations to which they apply and which they
form, all constitute part of the innate condition that “puts a limit on admissible
hypotheses.” If this suggestion is correct, then there is no more point asking
how these principles are learned than there is in asking how a child learns to
breathe, or, for that matter, to have two arms. Rather, the theory of learning
should try to characterize the particular strategies that a child uses to determine
that the language he is facing is one, rather than another, of the “admissible languages.” When the principles just alluded to are made precise, they constitute an
empirical assumption about the innate basis for the acquisition of knowledge,
an assumption that can be tested in a variety of ways. In particular, we can ask
whether it falls between the bounds described earlier: that is, does it ascribe a
rich enough innate structure to account for the acquisition of knowledge, but a
structure not so rich as to be falsified by the diversity of languages? We might
also ask many other questions, for example, how the schema that is proposed
as a basis for acquisition of knowledge of language relates to the principles that
“give a rule to abduction” in other domains of human (or animal) intelligence.
What I am suggesting is that if we wish to determine the relevance of linguistics to philosophy, we must investigate the conclusions that can be established

Linguistics and philosophy

153

concerning the nature of language, the ways in which language is used and
understood, the basis for its acquisition. I think that these conclusions have
interesting consequences for psychological theory – in particular, that they
strongly support an account of mental processes that is, in part, familiar, from
rationalist speculation about these matters. They support the conclusion that
the role of intrinsic organization is very great in perception, and that a highly
restrictive initial schema determines what counts as “linguistic experience” and
what knowledge arises on the basis of this experience. I also think, and have
argued elsewhere, that the empiricist doctrines that have been prevalent in linguistics, philosophy, and psychology in recent years, if formulated in a fairly
precise way, can be refuted by careful study of language. If philosophy is what
philosophers do, then these conclusions are relevant to philosophy, both in its
classical and modern varieties.
At this point, I would like to turn to some of the critical analysis of this point
of view that has appeared in the recent philosophical literature, specifically, to
the items referred to in note 2.
Goodman’s treatment of these questions seems to me to suffer, first, from a
historical misunderstanding; second, from a failure to formulate correctly the
exact nature of the problem of acquisition of knowledge and third, from a lack
of familiarity with the work that has led to the conclusions that he criticizes,
those that are outlined above.
His historical misunderstanding has to do with the issue between Locke and
whoever it was that Locke thought he was criticizing in his discussion of innate
ideas. Goodman believes that “Locke made . . . acutely clear” that the doctrine
of innate ideas is “false or meaningless.” I will not dwell on this matter, since it
is a commonplace of historical scholarship that Locke’s critique of the doctrine
of innate ideas “assails it in its crudest form, in which it is countenanced by
no eminent advocate.”4 Even Lord Herbert makes it clear that the common
notions “remain latent” in the absence of appropriate stimulation, that they
are the “principles without which we should have no experience at all” but
that they will obviously not be constantly in consciousness, even to “normal
men,” and certainly not to those who are “headstrong, foolish, weak-minded
and imprudent,” to “madmen, drunkards, and infants,” and so on. And as these
ideas are elaborated by Descartes and others, it is repeatedly emphasized that
while innate ideas and principles determine the nature of experience and the
knowledge that can arise from it, they will ordinarily not be in consciousness.
Since Locke’s arguments fail to come to grips with the “dispositional” nature
of innate structure that is insistently maintained by the leading proponents of
rationalist doctrine, they also invariably miss the mark; it seems that he must
4

A. C. Fraser (ed.), in his edition of Locke’s Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 1894
(reprinted by Dover, 1959), p. 38 of the Dover edition.

154

Language and Mind

have mistaken the actual views of Herbert, Descartes, the minor Cartesians,
Cudworth, and others.
It is surprising that Goodman accuses those who “identify the innate ideas
with capacities” of “sophistry.” Goodman is free, if he wishes, to use the terms
“idea” and “innate idea” in accordance with Locke’s misunderstanding of rationalist doctrine, but hardly to accuse others of “sophistry” when they examine
and develop this doctrine in the form in which it was actually presented. It is
particularly surprising to hear Goodman speak of the necessity of applying the
term “idea,” in “its normal use.” One would hardly expect Goodman to propose
this sort of “ordinary language argument” against the use of a technical term.
Furthermore, as Thomas Reid pointed out, if we use “idea” in the nontechnical
way, then not only the position of Descartes, but also that of Locke and Hume
reduces to absurdity – an observation that is correct, but that shows nothing
more than the absurdity of insisting that a technical term must be understood in
“the normal use” of the homonymous nontechnical term of ordinary discourse.
Let me turn, however, to the substantive problem of acquisition of knowledge,
as Goodman formulates it in the specific case of language acquisition. Quite
properly, he distinguishes two cases: initial language, and second-language
acquisition. But his analysis of the two cases leaves much to be desired.
Consider first the problem of second-language acquisition. In what I understand to be Goodman’s view,5 second-language acquisition poses no problem,
since “once one language is available and can be used for giving explanation
and instruction, the limitations [determined by an innate schematism] are transcended.” This way of putting the matter misconstrues the situation in two basic
respects. First, it is misleading to speak of the innate schematism that has been
proposed as merely providing “limitations” for acquisition of language. Rather,
what has been proposed is that this schematism makes possible the acquisition
of a rich and highly specific system on the basis of limited data. To take one
example, the problem is to explain how the data available to a language learner
(first or second) suffices to establish that the phonological rules (the rules that
assign phonetic representations to surface structures) apply cyclically, first to
innermost phrases of the surface structure, then to larger phrases, etc., until the
maximal domain of phonological processes – in simple cases, the full sentence –
is reached. There is in fact good evidence that the rules do apply cyclically, but
this evidence is not of a sort that can be used as the basis for induction from phonetic data to the principle of cyclic application, by any procedure of induction
that has general validity. In particular, much of this evidence is derived from an
analysis of percepts, that is, from investigation of the way in which someone
5

Cf. his article in the symposium in Synthese, Vol. 17, No. 1, March 1967, p. 24. Given the
dialogue form of his article, it is difficult to be certain that one is not misrepresenting his position.
However, I see no other way to interpret these remarks.

Linguistics and philosophy

155

who has already mastered the language interprets speech signals. It seems that
this interpretation imposes a certain structure that is not indicated directly in
the speech signal, for example, in the determination of stress contours.6 Obviously the child cannot acquire the knowledge that phonological rules apply
cyclically from data that are available to him only after he knows and makes
use of this principle. This is an extreme example, but it nevertheless illustrates
quite well the basic problem: to explain how a rich and highly specific grammar
is developed on the basis of limited data that is consistent with a vast number
of other conflicting grammars. An innate schematism is proposed, correctly or
incorrectly, as an empirical hypothesis to explain the uniformity, specificity, and
richness of detail and structure of the grammars that are, in fact, constructed
and used by the person who has mastered the language. Therefore the word
“limitation” in Goodman’s formulation is quite inappropriate.
More serious, it must be recognized that one does not learn the grammatical
structure of a second language through “explanation and instruction,” beyond
the most elementary rudiments, for the simple reason that no one has enough
explicit knowledge about this structure to provide explanation and instruction.
For example, consider the property of nominalization in English noted earlier,
namely, that a certain class of nominal expressions corresponds only to deep
and not surface structures. The person who has learned English as a second
language well enough to make the judgments illustrated by examples 1–10 has
not acquired this knowledge through “explanation and instruction.” Until quite
recently, no one, to my knowledge, was aware of this phenomenon; the secondlanguage learner, like the first-language learner, has somehow established the
facts for himself, without explanation or instruction. Again, the example is quite
typical. Only a trivial part of the knowledge that the second-language learner
acquires is presented to him by direct instruction. Even the most cursory attention to the facts of second-language acquisition is sufficient to establish this.
Hence, although second-language acquisition is, indeed, to be distinguished
from first-language acquisition, the distinction is not of the sort that Goodman
suggests. While it may be true that “once some language is available, acquisition of others is relatively easy,” it nevertheless remains a very serious problem – not significantly different from the problem of explaining first-language
acquisition – to account for this fact.
Consider now the more important matter of first-language acquisition, the
problem to which the empirical hypotheses regarding innate schematism have
6

For some discussion, see my paper “Explanatory Models in Linguistics,” in E. Nagel, P. Suppes,
and A. Tarski, eds., Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
University Press, 1962). For some recent and much more extensive discussion, see N. Chomsky
and M. Halle, Sound Patterns of English (New York: Harper & Row, 1968), and the references
cited there, and my paper “Some General Properties of Phonological Rules,” Language, Vol. 43,
March 1967, pp. 102–28.

156

Language and Mind

been directed. Goodman argues that there is no problem in explaining firstlanguage acquisition, because “acquisition of an initial language is acquisition
of a secondary symbolic system”: the fundamental step has already been taken,
and details can be elaborated within an already existing framework. This argument might have some force if it were possible to show that some of the specific
properties of grammar – say the distinction of deep and surface structure, the
specific properties of grammatical transformations and phonological rules, the
principles of rule ordering, and so on – were present in these already acquired
prelinguistic “symbolic systems.” But there is not the slightest reason to believe
that this is so. Goodman’s argument is based on a metaphorical use of the term
“symbolic system,” and collapses as soon as we try to give this term a precise meaning. If it were possible to show that “prelinguistic symbolic systems”
share certain significant properties with natural language, we could then argue
that these properties of natural language are somehow acquired by “analogy,”
though we would now face the problem of explaining how the “prelinguistic symbolic systems” developed these properties and how the analogies are
established. But the issue is academic, since, for the moment, there is no reason to suppose the assumption to be true. Goodman’s argument is a bit like a
“demonstration” that there is no problem in accounting for the development of
complex organs, because everyone knows that mitosis takes place. This seems
to me to be obscurantism, which can be maintained only so long as one fails to
come to grips with the actual facts.
There is, furthermore, a non sequitur in Goodman’s discussion of first- and
second-language acquisition. Recall that he explains the presumed ease of
second-language acquisition on the grounds that it is possible to use the first language for explanation and instruction. He then goes on to argue that “acquisition
of an initial language is acquisition of a secondary symbolic system,” and is
hence quite on a par with second-language acquisition. The primary symbolic
systems he has in mind are “rudimentary prelinguistic symbolic systems in
which gestures and sensory and perceptual occurrences of all sorts function as
signs.” But evidently these systems, whatever they may be, cannot “be used for
giving explanation and instruction” in the way in which a first language can be
used in second-language acquisition. Consequently, even on his own grounds,
Goodman’s argument is incoherent.
Goodman maintains that “the claim we are discussing cannot be experimentally tested even when we have an acknowledged example of a ‘bad’ language,
and . . . that the claim has not even been formulated to the extent of citation of
a single general property of ‘bad’ languages.” The first of these conclusions is
correct, in his sense of “experimental test,” namely, a test in which we “take an
infant at birth, isolate it from all the influences of our language-bound culture,
and attempt to inculcate it with one of the ‘bad’ artificial languages.” Obviously,
this is not feasible, exactly as comparable experimental tests are not feasible in

Linguistics and philosophy

157

any other area of human psychology. But there is no reason for dismay at the
impracticality of such direct tests as these. There are many other ways – those
discussed earlier, and extensively in the literature – in which evidence can be
obtained regarding the properties of grammars and in which hypotheses regarding the general properties of such grammars can be put to empirical test. Any
such hypothesis immediately specifies, correctly or incorrectly, certain properties of “bad” languages. It therefore makes an empirical claim that can be
falsified by finding counterinstances in some human language, or by showing
that under the actual conditions of language acquisition, the properties in question do not appear in the system that is developed by the language learner. In
linguistics, as in any other field, it is only in such indirect ways as these that one
can hope to find evidence bearing on nontrivial hypotheses. Direct experimental
tests of the sort that Goodman, for some reason, regards as necessary, are rarely
feasible, a fact that may be unfortunate but that is nevertheless characteristic of
most research.
Goodman’s further claim, that not “a single general property of ‘bad’ languages has been formulated,” is quite unfair. There are dozens of books and
papers concerned with formulating properties of universal grammar and examining their empirical consequences, and each such property specifies “bad”
languages, as just noted. One is free to argue that these attempts are misguided,
inadequate, unconvincing, refuted by facts, etc., but not to deny blandly that
they exist. I do not see how to avoid the conclusion that when Goodman speaks
of “the unimpressive evidence adduced with respect to languages,” he simply
speaks out of ignorance, rather than from a considered analysis of the work that
has been done in the field.
In discussing properties of “bad” languages, Goodman refers only to one case,
namely, the case of the concocted language Gruebleen, which “differs from
ordinary English only in that it contains the predicates ‘grue’ (for “examined
before t and green or not so examined and blue”) and ‘bleen’ (for “examined
before t and blue or not so examined and green”) in place of the predicates
‘green’ and ‘blue.’” He argues that even in this case, one must be “painfully
aware of the difficulties of answering” the question of what in general is “the
difference between Gruebleen-like and English-like languages.” I think that
this is a rather marginal issue, since much more deep-seated properties of
“English-like languages” have been formulated and investigated, but, since
he brings up this example, it is well to point out that the difficulties to which he
alludes are in large measure a consequence of the vagueness of the question he
asks. Thus there is no difficulty in finding some property of Gruebleen that is
not a property of “English-like languages,” even a property of some generality. For example, consider the predicate “match” understood as in Goodman’s
Structure of Appearance, but applying now to objects rather than qualia. Thus
two objects match “if and only if they are not noticeably different on direct

158

Language and Mind

comparison.”7 Gruebleen has the curious property that if an object A is examined before t and an object B is examined after t, and both are found to be
grue (or both bleen), then we know that they will not match. But there is no
t such that given two objects, one examined before t and one after t, and both
found to be green (or blue), we can predict that they will not match. They
may not match, but then they also may match, if both are green (or blue). In
fact, it is undoubtedly a general property of natural languages that they are
“English-like” rather than “Gruebleen-like,” in this sense, in the domain of
color terms. Thus there is no difficulty in establishing a fairly general distinction between Gruebleen-like and English-like languages, in this specific respect.
Of course, this would not satisfy Goodman’s requirements, for his special purposes, because one can construct other problems of the gruebleen type that are
not taken account of by this property. As long as Goodman’s vague notions
“English-like” and “Gruebleen-like” are left unspecified, there is of course no
way to meet his demand that a general property be stated distinguishing the
two kinds of language, and any specific distinction that is proposed will always
give rise to new riddles of induction. This is an interesting comment about the
limitations of inductive methods, but has no more relevance to the problem of
specifying the characteristics of universal grammar than to any other enterprise
of science, say, the problem of specifying the genetic conditions that determine
that a human embyro will develop legs rather than wings, under a given range of
conditions.
I am not, incidentally, proposing that the property just cited serves to explain
why every language-learner (in fact, every mouse, chimpanzee, etc.) uses green
rather than grue as the basis for generalization. No doubt this is a simple consequence of certain properties of the sensory system, a conclusion that is quite
uninteresting from Goodman’s point of view, but not, for that reason, incorrect.
Returning to the main point, it is interesting that at one stage of his argument
Goodman remarks, quite correctly, that even if “for certain remarkable facts I
have no alternative explanation,” “that alone does not dictate acceptance of . . . an
intrinsically repugnant and incomprehensible theory.” But now let us consider
the theory of innate ideas that arouses Goodman’s indignation, and ask whether
it is “incomprehensible” and “repugnant.”
Consider first the matter of comprehensibility. It does not seem to me incomprehensible that some aspect of the “final state”of an organism or automaton
should also be an aspect of its “initial state,” prior to any interaction with the
environment, just as it is not incomprehensible that this aspect of the final
state should have developed through internal processes, perhaps set in motion
7

N. Goodman, Structure of Appearance, 2nd edn. (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1966), p. 272.
The distinction between Gruebleen and English that I am now discussing is not to be confused
with a pseudodistinction, correctly rejected by J. Ullian on the basis of a different usage of the
notion “match.” See Philosophical Review, July 1961.

Linguistics and philosophy

159

by organism–environment interaction of some sort. But consider the actual
doctrines developed in the speculative psychology of rationalism, rather than
Locke’s caricature. Descartes, for example, argued that the idea of a triangle
is innate in that “the idea of a true triangle . . . can be more easily conceived
by our mind than the more complex figure of the triangle drawn on paper,” so
that when a child first sees the more complex figure, he will “apprehend not
it itself, but rather the authentic triangle.” As Cudworth elaborates this view,
“every irregular and imperfect triangle [is] as perfectly that which it is, as the
most perfect triangle,” but we interpret sensory images in terms of a notion of
“regular figure” that has its source in the “rule, pattern and exemplar” generated
by the mind as an “anticipation,” just as we interpret all sensory data in terms
of certain concepts of object and relations among objects, certain notions of
cause and effect, gestalt properties, functions in a “space” of possible human
actions, and so on. Neither this view, nor its elaboration in modern psychology, is incomprehensible, though it may of course be misguided or incorrect.
Similarly, there is no difficulty in comprehending the proposal that there are
certain innate conditions on the form of grammar that determine what constitutes linguistic experience and what knowledge will arise on the basis of
this experience. Again, one can easily design an automaton that will function in this manner, so that although the proposal may be wrong, it is not
incomprehensible.
Whatever Goodman’s attitudes might be to these formulations, it is interesting
that he appears quite willing, at least in this paper, to accept the view that in some
sense the mature mind contains ideas; it is obviously not incomprehensible, then,
that some of these ideas are “implanted in the mind as original equipment,” to
use his terminology. His argument is directed not against the notion that “ideas
are in the mind,” but rather against the assumption that they are “in the mind”
prior to experience, and surely if one assumption is comprehensible, then the
other is as well (though neither, as noted, does justice to the classical rationalist
view or to its modern variants). On the other hand, this approach to the problem
of acquisition of knowledge will, no doubt, be “repugnant” to one who considers
empiricist doctrine immune to doubt or challenge. But this is to treat empiricist
doctrines as articles of religious faith. Surely it is not reasonable to be so bound
to a tradition as to refuse to examine conflicting views about acquisition of
knowledge on their merits.
Let me turn next to Hilary Putnam’s contribution to the same symposium.
Although his paper deals more directly with the points that are actually at issue,
still it seems to me that his arguments are inconclusive, primarily because
of certain erroneous assumptions about the nature of the acquired grammars.
Specifically, he enormously underestimates, and in part misdescribes, the richness of structure, the particular and detailed properties of grammatical form and
organization that must be accounted for by a “language acquisition model,” that

160

Language and Mind

are acquired by the normal speaker–hearer and that appear to be uniform among
speakers and also across languages.
To begin with, Putnam assumes that at the level of sound structure, the
only property that can be proposed in universal grammar is that a language
has “a short list of phonemes.” This uniformity among languages, he argues,
requires no elaborate explanatory hypothesis. It can be explained simply in
terms of “such parameters as memory span and memory capacity,” and no
“rank Behaviorists” would have denied that these are innate properties. In fact,
however, very strong empirical hypotheses have been proposed regarding the
choice of universal distinctive features, the form of phonological rules, the
ordering and organization of these rules, the relation of syntactic structure
to phonetic representation, none of which can conceivably be accounted for
on grounds of memory limitations. Putnam bases his account largely on my
“Explanatory Models in Linguistics” (see note 6), which examines in some
detail the principle of cyclic application of phonological rules, a principle that,
if correct, raises some rather serious problems. We must ask how the child
acquires knowledge of this principle, a feat that is particularly remarkable since,
as already noted, much of the evidence that leads the linguist to posit this
principle is drawn from the study of percepts and is thus not even available to
the child. Similar questions arise with respect to many other aspects of universal
phonology. In any event, if the proposals that have been elaborated regarding
sound structure are correct or near correct, then the similarities among languages
at this level, and the richness of the knowledge acquired by the child, are indeed
remarkable facts, and demand an explanation.
Above the level of sound structure, Putnam assumes that the only significant properties of language are that they have proper names, that the grammar
contains a phrase-structure component, and that there are rules “abbreviating”
sentences generated by the phrase-structure component. He argues that the specific character of the phrase-structure component is determined by the existence
of proper names; that the existence of a phrase-structure component is explained
by the fact that “all the natural measures of complexity of an algorithm . . . lead
to the . . . result” that phrase-structure systems provide the “algorithms which
are ‘simplest’ for virtually any computing system,” hence also “for naturally
evolved ‘computing systems’”; that there is nothing surprising in the fact that
languages contain rules of abbreviations. Hence, he concludes, the only innate
conditions that must be postulated are those that apply to all reasonable “computing systems,” and no Behaviorist should feel any surprise at this.
Each of the three conclusions, however, is vitiated by a false assumption.
First, it is obvious that there are many different phrase-structure grammars
consistent with the assumption that one of the categories is that of proper names.
In fact, there is much dispute at the moment about the general properties of the
underlying base system for natural languages; the dispute is not in the least

Linguistics and philosophy

161

resolved by the existence of proper names as a primitive category in many
languages.8
As to the second point, it is simply untrue that all measures of complexity and
speed of computation lead to phrase-structure rules as the “simplest possible
algorithm.” The only existing results that have even an indirect relevance to
this matter are those dealing with context-free phrase-structure grammars and
their automata-theoretic interpretation. Context-free grammars are a reasonable
model for the rules generating deep structures, when we exclude the lexical
items and the distributional conditions they meet. But even apart from this
fundamental discrepancy, the only existing results relate context-free grammars
to a class of automata called “nondeterministic pushdown storage automata,”
and these have no particularly striking properties insofar as speed or complexity
of computation are concerned, and are certainly not “natural” from this point
of view. In terms of time and space conditions on computation, the somewhat
similar but not formally related concept of real-time deterministic automaton
would seem to be far more natural. In short, there are no results demonstrating
that phrase-structure grammars are optimal in any computational sense (nor,
certainly, are there any results dealing with the much more complex notion of
base structure with a context-free phrase-structure grammar and a lexicon, with
much richer properties, as components).
But there is no point in pursuing this matter, since what is at stake, in any
event, is not the “simplicity” of phrase-structure grammars but rather of transformational grammars that contain a phrase-structure component, the latter
playing a role in the generation of deep structures. And there is absolutely no
mathematical concept of “ease of computation” or “simplicity of algorithm”
that even suggests that such systems have some advantage over the various
kinds of automata that have been investigated from this point of view. In fact,
these systems have never really been considered in a strictly mathematical context, though there are interesting initial attempts to study some of their formal
properties.9 The source of the confusion is a misconception on Putnam’s part
as to the nature of grammatical transformations. These are not, as he supposes,
rules that “abbreviate” sentences generated by phrase-structure rules. Rather,
they are operations that form surface structures from underlying deep structures, which are generated, in part, by phrase-structure rules. Although there
has been considerable evolution of theory since the notions of transformational
8

9

Not, incidentally, in all. Although this is hardly important here, it seems that many languages
do not have proper names as a primitive category, but rather form proper names by recursive
processes of an elaborate sort. See, for example, G. H. Matthews, Hidatsa Syntax (The Hague:
Mouton, 1965), pp. 191 f.
See, for example, S. Peters and R. Ritchie, “On the Generative Capacity of Transformational
Grammars,” Information Sciences (to be published); and J. P. Kimball, “Predicates Definable
over Transformational Derivations by Intersection with Regular Languages,” Information and
Control, Vol. 2, 1967, pp. 177–95.

162

Language and Mind

generative grammar were first proposed, one assumption that has remained constant is that the phrase-structure rules generate only abstract structures, which
are then mapped into surface structures by grammatical transformations – the
latter being structure-dependent operations of a peculiar sort that have never
been studied outside of linguistics, in particular, nor in any branch of mathematics with which I am familiar. To show that transformational grammars are
the “simplest possible” one would have to demonstrate that an optimal computing system would take a string of symbols as input and determine its surface
structure, the underlying deep structure, and the sequence of transformational
operations that relate these two labeled bracketings. Nothing known about ease
or simplicity of computation gives any reason to suppose that this is true; in
fact, the question has never been raised. One can think of certain kinds of organization of memory that might be well adapted to transformational grammars,
but this is a different matter entirely.10 I would, naturally, assume that there is
some more general basis in human mental structure for the fact (if it is a fact)
that languages have transformational grammars; one of the primary scientific
reasons for studying language is that this study may provide some insight into
general properties of mind. Given those specific properties, we may then be able
to show that transformational grammars are “natural.” This would constitute
real progress, since it would now enable us to raise the problem of innate conditions on acquisition of knowledge and belief in a more general framework. But
it must be emphasized that, contrary to what Putnam asserts, there is no basis
for assuming that “reasonable computing systems” will naturally be organized
in the specific manner suggested by transformational grammar.
I believe that this disposes of Putnam’s main argument, namely, that there is
“nothing surprising,” even to a Behaviorist, in the linguistic universals that are
now being proposed and investigated. Let me then turn to his second argument,
that even if there were surprising linguistic universals, they could be accounted
for by a simpler hypothesis than that of an innate universal grammar, namely,
the hypothesis of common origin of languages. This proposal misrepresents
the problem at issue. As noted earlier, the empirical problem we face is to
devise a hypothesis about initial structure rich enough to account for the fact
that a specific grammar is acquired, under given conditions of access to data. To
this problem, the matter of common origin of language is quite irrelevant. The
grammar has to be discovered by the child on the basis of the data available to
him, through the use of the innate capacities with which he is endowed. To be
concrete, consider again the two examples discussed above: the association of
nominal phrases to base structures and the cyclic application of phonological
10

For some speculations on this matter, see G. A. Miller and N. Chomsky, “Finitary Models
of Language Users,” Part II, in R. D. Luce, R. Bush, and E. Galanter, eds., Handbook of
Mathematical Psychology (New York: Wiley, 1963), Vol. II.

Linguistics and philosophy

163

rules. The child masters these principles (if we are correct in our conclusions
about grammar) on the basis of certain linguistic data; he knows nothing about
the origin of language and could not make use of such information if he had
it. Questions of common origin are relevant to the empirical problems we are
discussing only in that the existing languages might not be a “fair sample” of
the “possible languages,” in which case we might be led mistakenly to propose
too narrow a schema for universal grammar. This possibility must be kept in
mind, of course, but it seems to me a rather remote consideration, given the
problem that is actually at hand, namely, the problem of finding a schema rich
enough to account for the development of the grammars that seem empirically
justified. The discovery of such a schema may provide an explanation for the
empirically determined universal properties of language. The existence of these
properties, however, does not explain how a specific grammar is acquired by
the child.
Putnam’s discussion of the ease of language-learning seems to me beside the
point. The question whether there is a critical period for language-learning is
interesting,11 but it has little relevance to the problem under discussion. Suppose
that Putnam were correct in believing that “certainly . . . 600 hours [of direct
method instruction] will enable any adult to speak and read a foreign language
with ease.” We would then face the problem of explaining how, on the basis
of this restricted data, the learner has succeeded in acquiring the specific and
detailed knowledge that enables him to use the language with ease, and to
produce and understand a range of structures of which the data presented to
him constitute a minute sample.
Finally, consider the alternative approach that Putnam suggests to the problem of language acquisition. He argues that instead of postulating an innate
schematism one should attempt to account for this achievement in terms of
“general multipurpose learning strategies.” It is these that must be innate, not
general conditions on the form of the knowledge that is acquired. Evidently,
this is an empirical issue. It would be sheer dogmatism to assert of either of
these proposals (or of some particular combination of them) that it must be
correct. Putnam is convinced, on what grounds he does not say, that the innate
basis for the acquisition of language must be identical with that for acquiring
any other form of knowledge, that there is nothing “special” about the acquisition of language. A nondogmatic approach to this problem can be pursued,
through the investigation of specific areas of human competence, such as language, followed by the attempt to devise a hypothesis that will account for
the development of such competence. If we discover that the same “learning
strategies” are involved in a variety of cases, and that these suffice to account
11

See E. H. Lenneberg, Biological Foundations of Language (New York: Wiley, 1967), for evidence bearing on this issue.

164

Language and Mind

for the acquired competence, then we will have good reason to believe that
Putnam’s empirical hypothesis is correct. If, on the other hand, we discover
that different innate systems (whether involving schemata or heuristics) have
to be postulated, then we will have good reason to believe that an adequate theory of mind will incorporate separate “faculties,” each with unique or partially
unique properties. I cannot see how one can resolutely insist on one or the other
conclusion in the light of the evidence now available to us. But one thing is
quite clear: Putnam has no justification for his final conclusion, that “invoking
‘Innateness’ only postpones the problem of learning; it does not solve it.”12
Invoking an innate representation of universal grammar does solve the problem
of learning (at least partially), in this case, if in fact it is true that this is the basis
(or part of the basis) for language acquisition, as it well may be. If, on the other
hand, there exist general learning strategies that account for the acquisition of
grammatical knowledge, then postulation of an innate representation of universal grammar will not “postpone” the problem of learning, but will rather offer
an incorrect solution to this problem. The issue is an empirical one of truth or
falsity, not a methodological one of stages of investigation. At the moment, the
only concrete proposal that is at all plausible, in my opinion, is the one sketched
above. When some “general learning strategy” is suggested, we can look into
the relative adequacy of these alternatives, on empirical grounds.
Henry Hiż’s review article deals mainly with the distinction between competence and performance. One can attempt to explain technical concepts such
as these in two different ways. At a presystematic level, one can try to indicate,
12

Or for his assumption that the “weighting functions” proposed in universal grammar constitute
the “sort of fact . . . [that] . . . learning theory tries to account for; not the explanation being
sought.” No one would say that the genetic basis for the development of arms rather than wings
in a human embryo is “the kind of fact that learning theory tries to account for,” rather than the
basis for explanation of other facts about human behavior. The question whether the weighting
function is learned, or whether it is the basis for learning, is an empirical one. There is not the
slightest reason to assume, a priori, that it is to be accounted for by learning rather than genetic
endowment, or some combination of the two.
There are other minor points in Putnam’s discussion that call for some comment. For example,
he asserts that since certain ambiguities “require coaching to detect,” it follows that “the claim
that grammar ‘explains the ability to recognize ambiguities’ . . . lacks the impressiveness that
Chomsky believes it to have.” But he misconstrues the claim, which relates to competence, not
performance. What the grammar explains is why “the shooting of the hunters” (the example
he cites) can be understood with hunters as subject or object but that in “the growth of corn”
we can understand “corn” only as subject (the explanation, in this case, turns on the relation of
nominalizations to deep structures, noted earlier). The matter of coaching is beside the point.
What is at issue is the inherent sound–meaning correlation that is involved in performance,
but only as one of many factors. Putnam also misstates the argument for assuming the active–
passive relation to be transformational. It is not merely that the speaker knows them to be related.
Obviously that would be absurd; the speaker also knows that “John will leave tomorrow” and
“John will leave three days after the day before yesterday” are related, but this does not imply
that there is a transformational relation between the two. Syntactic arguments are given in many
places in the literature. See, for example, my Syntactic Structures (The Hague: Mouton, 1957);
Aspects of the Theory of Syntax.

Linguistics and philosophy

165

necessarily in a loose and somewhat vague and only suggestive way, just what
role the concept is intended to play in a more general framework, and why it
seems to be a useful idea to try to develop. Discussion at this level is entirely
legitimate, but there will generally be much room for misunderstanding. At a
second level, one can develop the concept in as precise a way as the state of the
field permits, with no consideration for motivation or general implications. At
this level, the problem is to determine not what the concept in question is, but
why there is any point in developing it.
At the presystematic level, I have tried to explain what I mean by “linguistic competence” in terms of models of use and acquisition of language, in the
manner outlined earlier. At the systematic level, competence is expressed by
a generative grammar that recursively enumerates structural descriptions of
sentences, each with its phonetic, syntactic, and semantic aspects. It is hardly
necessary to emphasize that any such grammar that we can actually present
today is incomplete, not only because our knowledge of particular languages
is deficient, but also because our understanding of phonetic and semantic representation and the kinds of structures and rules that mediate between them is
limited and unsatisfactory in many respects.
Turning to Hiż’s paper, there is, not surprisingly, a certain degree of misunderstanding between us at the presystematic level. Hiż suggests that my use of
the notion “competence” “is to be understood as saying that introspection is a
source of linguistic knowledge.” I do agree that introspection is an excellent
source of data for the study of language, but this conclusion does not follow
from the decision to study linguistic competence. One might (irrationally, in
my opinion) refuse to use such evidence, and still try to discover the generative grammar that represents “what is learned” and that plays a fundamental
role in language use. This decision would be pointless, rather on a par with an
astronomer’s refusal, at one stage of the science, to use what he sees through
a telescope as data, but the decision has nothing to do with the distinction
between competence and performance. I have no doubt that it would be possible to devise operational and experimental procedures that could replace the
reliance on introspection with little loss, but it seems to me that in the present
state of the field, this would simply be a waste of time and energy. Obviously,
any such procedure would first have to be tested against the introspective evidence. If one were to propose a test for, say, grammaticalness, that fails to make
the distinctions noted earlier in the proper way, one would have little faith in the
procedure as a test for grammaticalness. To me it seems that current research
is not hampered significantly by lack of accurate data, but rather by our inability to explain in a satisfactory way data that are hardly in question. One who
feels differently can support his point of view by demonstrating the gains in
insight and understanding that can be achieved by refinements in techniques
of data collection and analysis, say, by operational techniques for establishing

166

Language and Mind

grammaticalness, techniques that have been judged by the prior test of intuition
and shown to be sufficiently sound so that one can rely on them in difficult
or obscure cases. In any event, the whole matter has nothing to do with the
decision to study linguistic competence.
Hiż regards it as “paradoxical” to assert, as I have, that linguistics “attempts
to specify what the speaker actually knows, not what he may report about
his knowledge.” This he regards as “a peculiar sense of ‘knowledge.’” To me
it seems a rather ordinary sense, and a nonparadoxical usage. A person who
knows English may give all sorts of incorrect reports about the knowledge
that he actually possesses and makes use of constantly, without awareness. As
noted earlier, when we study competence – the speaker–hearer’s knowledge of
his language – we may make use of his reports and his behavior as evidence, but
we must be careful not to confuse “evidence” with the abstract constructs that
we develop on the basis of evidence and try to justify in terms of evidence. Thus
I would definitely reject three of the five conditions that, Hiż suggests, rules
must satisfy if they are to constitute an account of competence in my sense,
namely, that the native speaker feels that the sentences generated by the rules are
in his language, that they have the assigned structures, and that what the speaker
feels is true. Since performance – in particular, judgments about sentences –
obviously involves many factors apart from competence, one cannot accept as
an absolute principle that the speaker’s judgments will give an accurate account
of his knowledge. I am surprised that Hiż should offer this interpretation of my
views immediately after having quoted my statement that the speaker’s reports
about his competence may be in error.
At least for the purposes of discussion, Hiż is willing to accept the view that
a generative grammar, a system of rules assigning structures to sentences, can
serve to characterize competence. He then points out, correctly, that the linguist
is guided in his choice of a grammar by certain “general principles about language as such,” and that this general theory – universal grammar – will have
explanatory value if it selects particular grammars correctly. He then attributes
to me, incorrectly, the view that universal grammar is to be identified with “a
theory of language acquisition.” My view, rather, is that universal grammar is
one element of such a theory, much as competence is one element of a theory of
performance. There are surely many other factors involved in language acquisition beyond the schematism and weighting function that – if my suggestion is
correct – play a part in determining the nature of the acquired competence. This
misinterpretation of my proposal regarding the relation of universal grammar to
language acquisition parallels the misinterpretation of my proposal regarding
the relation of competence to performance; in both cases, what is omitted is the
reference to other factors that must be involved. In the case of language acquisition, furthermore, it must be emphasized that the model I am suggesting can
at best only be regarded as a first approximation to a theory of learning, since
it is an instantaneous model and does not try to capture the interplay between

Linguistics and philosophy

167

tentative hypotheses that the child may construct, new data interpreted in terms
of these hypotheses, new hypotheses based on these interpretations, and so on,
until some relatively fixed system of competence is established. I think that an
instantaneous model is a reasonable first approximation, but this, as any other
aspect of research strategy, must ultimately be evaluated in terms of its success
in providing explanations and insight.
Hiż regards the reference to classical formulations of problems of language
and mind as “confusing and misleading historical baggage.” I disagree with this
judgment, but have nothing to add here beyond what I have written elsewhere.13
My feeling is that the contributions of rationalist psychology and linguistics are
interesting in themselves, and are quite relevant to present concerns, more so, in
fact, than much of the work of the past century. One who finds these forays into
intellectual history “confusing and misleading” can perfectly well disregard
them. I see no issue here.
Before leaving this matter, I should mention that Hiż is inaccurate in stating
that Herbert of Cherbury restricted himself to “religious knowledge.” Nor can
Thomas Reid be described as one of those concerned to develop a doctrine of
innate universals. Furthermore, it is surely misleading to say that I “call upon”
Descartes and others “to support” my “stand on innate universals.” Their advocacy of a similar position does not constitute “support.” Rather, I am suggesting
that their contributions have been inadequately appreciated, and that we can still
learn a good deal from a careful study of them.
Hiż objects to the fact that my proposals concerning universal grammar are
based on detailed examination of a few languages rather than “examination
of many cases.” I certainly agree that one should study as many languages as
possible. Still, a caveat should be entered. It would be quite easy to present
enormous masses of data from varied languages that are compatible with all
conceptions of universal grammar that have so far been formulated. There
is no point in doing so. If one is concerned with the principles of universal
grammar, he will try to discover those properties of particular grammars that
bear on these principles, putting aside large amounts of material that, so far
as he can determine, do not. It is only through intensive studies of particular
languages that one can hope to find crucial evidence for the study of universal
grammar. One study such as that of Matthews on Hidatsa (see note 8) is worth
one thousand superficial studies of varied languages from this point of view. If
someone feels that the base of data is too narrow, what he should do is show that
some of the material omitted refutes the principles that have been formulated.
Otherwise, his criticism has no more force than a criticism of modern genetics
for basing its theoretical formulations on the detailed investigation of only a few
organisms.
13

In my Current Issues in Linguistic Theory (The Hague: Mouton, 1964), Section 1; Aspects of
the Theory of Syntax, Chapter 1, Section 8; Cartesian Linguistics (New York: Harper & Row,
1966).

168

Language and Mind

Hiż also argues that the principles of universal grammar, even if true, may
indicate only “the common historical origin of languages.” I have already
pointed out why this hypothesis is without explanatory force.
Hiż maintains that decisions about particular parts of grammar (by the linguist) are “determined not by a general theory but by internal usefulness within
the particular grammar,” and objects that I do not make this clear. Since I have
no idea what is meant by “internal usefulness,” I have nothing to say about
this point. The issue is confused by his misinterpretation of my use of the
notion “simplicity.” When I speak of “simplicity of grammar,” I am referring
to a “weighting function,” empirically determined, that selects a grammar of
the form permitted by the universal schematism over others that are also of the
proper form and are compatible with the empirical data. I am not using the
term “simplicity” to refer to that poorly understood property of theories that
leads the scientist to select one rather than another. The evaluation measure
that defines “simplicity of grammars” is part of linguistic theory. We must try
to discover this measure on empirical grounds, by considering the actual relations between input data and acquired grammars. Thus the notion “simplicity
of grammar” plays a role analogous to that of a physical constant; we must
establish it on empirical grounds, and there is no a priori insight on which we
can rely. The problems of defining “simplicity of theories” in a general context
of epistemology and philosophy of science are entirely irrelevant to the issue
of determining, on empirical grounds, the properties of grammars that lead to
the selection of one rather than another in language acquisition. This aspect has
been emphasized repeatedly. See, for example, Aspects, Chapter 1, Section 7.
One final comment. Hiż suggests that “it should be easier to explain why
we assign such-and-such a structure to a sentence by pointing out how this
sentence changes the readings of neighboring sentences than by referring to
innate universal ideas and mental reality.” Here he is confusing two entirely
different kinds of explanations. If I want to explain why, yesterday afternoon at
three o’clock, John Smith understood “the shooting of the hunters” as referring
to the act of shooting the hunters, rather than the hunters’ act of shooting, I will
of course bring into consideration the situational context (not limiting myself
to the “readings of neighboring sentences”). If I am interested in explaining
why this phrase is susceptible to these two interpretations, but the phrase “the
growth of corn” is susceptible to only one (namely, the corn’s growing and not
the act or process of growing corn), then I will appeal first to the particular
grammar of English, and more deeply, to the linguistic universals that led to the
construction of this grammar by a child exposed to certain data. Since entirely
different things are being explained, it is senseless to claim that one manner of
explanation is “easier” than the other.
Harman’s critique is also concerned with the matter of competence and performance. He begins by ascribing to me a view that I have never held, and have

Linguistics and philosophy

169

explicitly rejected on numerous occasions, namely, that “competence [is] the
knowledge that the language is described by the rules of the grammar,” and that
a grammar describes this “competence.” Obviously, it is absurd to suppose that
the speaker of the language knows the rules in the sense of being able to state
them. Having attributed to me this absurd view, Harman goes on to struggle
with all sorts of purported confusions and difficulties of interpretation. But he
cites nothing that could possibly be regarded as a basis for attributing to me this
view, though he does quote remarks in which I explicitly reject it. Therefore, I
will not discuss this part of his argument at all.
In Harman’s framework, there are two kinds of knowledge: knowing that and
knowing how. Obviously knowledge of a language is not a matter of “knowing that.” Therefore, for him, it must be a matter of “knowing how.” A typical
speaker “knows how to understand other speakers”; his competence is his ability “to speak and understand the language described by [the] grammar” that
describes the language. I do not know what Harman means by the locution
“knows how to understand,” but clearly he is using the term “competence” in
a different way from what I proposed in the work he is reviewing. In my sense
of “competence,” the ability to speak and understand the language involves not
only “competence” (that is, mastery of the generative grammar of the language,
tacit knowledge of the language), but also many other factors. In my usage,
the grammar is a formal representation of what I have called “competence.” I
have no objection to Harman’s using the term in a different way, but when he
insists on supposing that his usage is mine, naturally, only confusion will result.
Again, I see no point in tracing in detail the various difficulties into which this
misinterpretation leads him.
According to Harman, the “competence to speak and understand the language” is a skill, analogous to the skill of a bicycle rider. Given his insistence
that knowledge of language is a matter of “knowing how” (since it is obviously
not “knowing that”), this is not an unexpected conclusion. But he suggests no
respect in which ability to use a language (let alone the competence, in my
sense, that constitutes an element of this ability) is like the ability to ride a
bicycle, nor do I see any. The proper conclusion, then, would be that there is
no reason to suppose that knowledge of language can be characterized in terms
of “knowing how.” I therefore see no point in the analogy that he suggests.
Knowledge of language is not a skill, a set of habits, or anything of the sort.
I see nothing surprising in the conclusion that knowledge of language cannot
be discussed in any useful or informative way in this impoverished framework.
In general, it does not seem to me true that the concepts “knowing how” and
“knowing that” constitute exhaustive categories for the analysis of knowledge.
Nor is it surprising that Harman finds it difficult to understand my remarks, or
those of anyone else who is concerned with knowledge of language, given that
he insists on restricting himself to this framework.

170

Language and Mind

Harman tries to show that there is a fundamental incoherence in my proposal that in acquiring or using knowledge of a language (in developing “an
internal representation of a generative system” or making use of it in speaking
or understanding speech), the child makes use of an innate schematism that
restricts the choice of grammars (in the case of acquisition) or an internalized
grammar (in the case of language use). His argument seems to me unclear. As
I understand it, it seems to proceed as follows. He argues that this internalized
system must be presented in “another more basic language,” which the child
must come to understand before he can make use of this schematism to learn
this language, or before he can make use of the grammar to understand speech.
But this, he argues, leads to a vicious circle or an infinite regress. Thus if we
were to say that the child knows the “more basic language” directly, without
learning, then why not say also that he knows “directly the language he speaks,”
without learning; a vicious circle. Or, if we say that he must learn the more basic
language, then this raises the question how the more basic language is learned,
and leads to an infinite regress. This argument is totally invalid. Consider the
case of acquisition of language. Even if we assume that the innate schematism
must be represented in an “innate language,” neither conclusion follows. The
child must know this “innate language,” in Harman’s terms, but it does not
follow that he must “speak and understand it” (whatever this might mean) or
that he must learn it. All that we need assume is that he can make use of this
schematism when he approaches the task of language learning. So much for the
infinite regress. As to the vicious circle, there is a very simple reason why we
cannot assume that the child knows the language he speaks directly, without
learning, namely, that the assumption is false. We cannot claim that every child
is born with a perfect knowledge of English. On the other hand, there is no
reason why we should not suppose that the child is born with a perfect knowledge of universal grammar, that is, with a fixed schematism that he uses, in the
ways described earlier, in acquiring language. This assumption may be false,
but it is quite intelligible. If one insists on describing this knowledge as “direct
knowledge of a more basic language,” I see no reason to object, so long as we
are clear about what we mean, but would merely point out that there is no reason
at all to doubt that the child has this direct knowledge. Hence there is no vicious
circle, and no infinite regress. Similarly, if we consider the case of language
use, there is neither incoherence nor implausibility. There is surely no infinite
regress and no vicious circle in the assumption that in language use (speaking
or understanding) the user employs an internally represented grammar. We can
easily construct a model (say, a computer program) that functions in this way. I
therefore fail to see any basis for Harman’s belief that there is an infinite regress
or vicious circle inherent in, or even suggested by this formulation.
In the second part of his paper, Harman turns to my argument that current
work in linguistics supports a view of language and mind that has a distinctly

Linguistics and philosophy

171

rationalist flavor, and is in conflict with the empiricist views that have dominated
the study of language and mind in recent years. He asserts that to infer a grammar
from data, a model of language learning must already have detailed information
about the theory of performance. This is an interesting proposal, and it deserves
to be developed. But I cannot go along with his rather dogmatic claim, hardly
argued in the paper, that this approach must necessarily be correct, and that any
other approach must fail to provide any insight into the problem of acquisition
of knowledge. I think that the work of the past few years on universal grammar
does, in fact, suggest and in part support an interesting, rather classical approach
to the problem of how knowledge is acquired. In the absence of any argument
as to why this approach must fail to be illuminating, I see no reason not to
continue with the investigation of how principles of universal grammar might
select a particular grammar on the basis of the data available.
Let us turn now to the issue of rationalist and empiricist approaches to problems of language and mind. As Harman points out, if we describe an innate
schematism biased toward (or restricted to) a specific form of grammar as part
of the “principles of induction used,” and define “resourceful empiricism” as
a doctrine that makes use of such “principles of induction” as this, then surely
“resourceful empiricism” cannot be refuted, “no matter what the facts about
language [or anything else] turned out to be.” Of course, this new doctrine of
“resourceful empiricism” would now incorporate “principles of induction” that
are, so it seems, quite specific to the task of language acquisition and of no
general validity.
The concept “resourceful empiricism” so defined seems to me of little interest. The issue that concerns me is whether there are “ideas and principles of
various kinds that determine the form of the acquired knowledge in what may
be a rather restricted and highly organized way,” or alternatively, whether “the
structure of the acquisition device is limited to certain elementary peripheral
processing mechanisms . . . and certain analytical data-processing mechanisms
or inductive principles” (Aspects, pp. 47 f). I have argued that “it is historically
accurate as well as heuristically valuable to distinguish these two very different
approaches to the problem of acquisition of knowledge,” even though they of
course “cannot always be sharply distinguished” in the work of a particular
person (ibid., p. 52). In particular, I have tried to show that it is possible to
formulate these approaches so that the former incorporates the leading ideas
of classical rationalism as well as the modern variant I have been describing,
and that the latter includes classical empiricist doctrine as well as the theories
of acquisition of knowledge (or belief, or habit) developed in a wide range of
modern work (Quine’s notions of quality space and formation of knowledge by
association and conditioning; Hull’s approach in terms of primitive unconditioned reflexes, conditioning, and habit structures; taxonomic linguistics, with
its analytic procedures of segmentation and classification and its conception

172

Language and Mind

of language as a “habit system,” and so on).14 Needless to say, there is no
necessity to view the various attempts to study language acquisition within this
framework; I can only say that I think it is both useful and accurate. These alternatives can be made fairly precise and investigated in terms of their empirical
consequences. Harman’s proposal to define “resourceful empiricism” in such
a way as to include both approaches, and to be, as he notes, immune to any
factual discovery, is merely a pointless terminological suggestion and cannot
obscure the difference between the approaches mentioned or the importance of
pursuing and evaluating them.15
To summarize, I doubt that linguistics can provide “a new technique” for
analytic philosophy that will be of much significance, at least in its present
state of development. Nevertheless, it seems to me that the study of language
can clarify and in part substantiate certain conclusions about human knowledge
that relate directly to classical issues in the philosophy of mind. It is in this
domain, I suspect, that one can look forward to a really fruitful collaboration
between linguistics and philosophy in coming years.
14

15

Harman observes correctly that I ignore the “enormous philosophical literature on induction,”
and limit myself solely to an investigation of the procedures of taxonomic linguistics as “the
only proposals that are explicit enough to support serious study.” He does not, however, show
how anything in the literature on induction bears on the problems I am considering. The reason
is that there is nothing. The literature on induction is quite interesting, but it happens to deal
with entirely different questions. It does not even hint at procedures of analysis or acquisition of
belief or confirmation that would overcome the problems that I have been discussing. There is,
for example, nothing in the literature on induction that gives any insight into how the principles
cited above as examples (the cycle of phonological rules or the rule of nominalization) might
be reached “by induction” from the data available. But it is such questions as these that must
be faced in the study of language acquisition.
Two minor points in this connection. Harman sees only a “tenuous historical connection”
between procedures of segmentation and classification and phrase-structure grammar. The connection is actually much closer. Zellig Harris, in his Methods in Structural Linguistics (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1951), tried to show how a systematic use of such procedures,
amplified by a simple inductive step, would lead to a set of rules that might be regarded
as generating an infinite set of sentences. A set of Harris’ “morpheme to utterance” formulas,
though not quite the same as phrase-structure grammar, is quite similar. The concept of “phrasestructure grammar” was explicitly designed to express the richest system that could reasonably
be expected to result from the application of Harris-type procedures to a corpus. Harris, and
other methodologists of the 1940s, were developing an approach to linguistic analysis that one
can trace at least to Saussure.
Secondly, Harman is quite correct in pointing out that in my reference to “the only [empiricist]
proposals that are explicit enough to support serious study,” I omitted mention of Harris’ and
Hiż’s method of studying co-occurrence relationships. He feels that this method is “similar in
spirit to the taxonomic procedures.” I don’t see the point in arguing this, one way or another. In
any event, I know of no reason to suppose that such procedures can lead to or can even provide
evidence for or against the postulation of a generative grammar.

7

Biolinguistics and the human capacity

I would like to say a few words about what has come to be called “the biolinguistic perspective,” which began to take shape half a century ago in discussions
among a few graduate students who were much influenced by developments in
biology and mathematics in the early postwar years, including work in ethology that was just coming to be known in the United States. One of them
was Eric Lenneberg, whose seminal 1967 study Biological Foundations of
Language remains a basic document of the field. By then considerable interchange was proceeding, including interdisciplinary seminars and international
conferences. The most far-reaching one, in 1974, was called, for the first time,
“Biolinguistics.” Many of the leading questions discussed there remain very
much alive today.
One of these questions, repeatedly brought up as “one of the basic questions
to be asked from the biological point of view,” is the extent to which apparent
principles of language, including some that had only recently come to light,
are unique to this cognitive system. An even more basic question from the
biological point of view is how much of language can be given a principled
explanation, whether or not homologous elements can be found in other domains
or organisms. The effort to sharpen these questions and to investigate them for
language has come to be called “the minimalist program” in recent years, but
the questions arise for any biological system, and are independent of theoretical
persuasion, in linguistics and other domains. Answers to these questions are
not only fundamental to understanding the nature and functioning of organisms
and their subsystems, but also to investigation of their growth and evolution.
The biolinguistic perspective views a person’s language in all its aspects –
sound, meaning, structure – as a state of some component of the mind, understanding “mind” in the sense of eighteenth-century scientists who recognized
that after Newton’s demolition of the “mechanical philosophy,” based on the
intuitive concept of a material world, no coherent mind–body problem remains,
and we can only regard aspects of the world “termed mental,” as the result
of “such an organical structure as that of the brain,” as chemist–philosopher
Joseph Priestley observed. Thought is a “little agitation of the brain,” David
Hume remarked; and, as Darwin commented a century later, there is no
173

174

Language and Mind

reason why “thought, being a secretion of the brain,” should be considered
“more wonderful than gravity, a property of matter.” By then, the more tempered view of the goals of science that Newton introduced had become scientific
common sense: Newton’s reluctant conclusion that we must be satisfied with
the fact that universal gravity exists, even if we cannot explain it in terms of the
self-evident “mechanical philosophy.” As many commentators have observed,
this intellectual move “set forth a new view of science” in which the goal is
“not to seek ultimate explanations” but to find the best theoretical account we
can of the phenomena of experience and experiment (I. Bernard Cohen).
The central issues in the domain of study of mind still arise, in much the same
form. They were raised prominently at the end of the “Decade of the Brain,”
which brought the last millennium to a close. The American Academy of Arts
and Sciences published a volume to mark the occasion, summarizing the current
state of the art. The guiding theme was formulated by neuroscientist Vernon
Mountcastle in his introduction to the volume: it is the thesis that “Things mental, indeed minds, are emergent properties of brains, [though] these emergences
are not regarded as irreducible but are produced by principles . . . we do not yet
understand.” The same thesis, which closely paraphrases Priestley, has been
put forth in recent years as an “astonishing hypothesis” of the new biology, a
“radically new idea” in the philosophy of mind, “the bold assertion that mental
phenomena are entirely natural and caused by the neurophysiological activities
of the brain,” and so on. But this is a misunderstanding. The thesis follows from
the collapse of any coherent concept of “body” or “material” in the seventeeth
century, as was soon recognized. Terminology aside, the fundamental thesis
remains what has been called “Locke’s suggestion”: that God might have chosen to “superadd to matter a faculty of thinking” just as he “annexed effects to
motion, which we can in no way conceive motion able to produce.”
Mountcastle’s reference to reductive principles that we “do not yet understand” also begs some interesting questions, as a look at the history of science
illustrates, even quite recent science. It is reminiscent of Bertrand Russell’s
observation in 1929, also reflecting standard beliefs, that “chemical laws cannot
at present be reduced to physical laws.” The phrase “at present,” like Mountcastle’s word “yet,” expresses the expectation that the reduction should take
place in the normal course of scientific progress, perhaps soon. In the case of
physics and chemistry, it never did: what happened was unification of a virtually
unchanged chemistry with a radically revised physics. It’s hardly necessary to
add that the state of understanding and achievement in those areas eighty years
ago was far beyond anything that can be claimed for the brain and cognitive
sciences today. Hence confidence in “reduction” to the little that is understood
is not necessarily appropriate.
From the array of phenomena that one might loosely consider languagerelated, the biolinguistic approach focuses attention on a component of human

Biolinguistics and the human capacity

175

biology that enters into the use and acquisition of language, however one interprets the term “language.” Call it the “faculty of language,” adapting a traditional term to a new usage. This component is more or less on a par with the
system of mammalian vision, insect navigation, or others. In many of these
cases, the best available explanatory theories attribute to the organism computational systems and what is called “rule-following” in informal usage – for
example, when a recent text on vision presents the so-called “rigidity principle”
as it was formulated fifty years ago: “if possible, and other rules permit, interpret image motions as projections of rigid motions in three dimensions.” In
this case, later work provided substantial insight into the mental computations
that seem to be involved when the visual system follows these rules, but even
for very simple organisms, that is typically no slight task, and relating mental
computations to analysis at the cellular level is commonly a distant goal. Some
philosophers have objected to the notion “rule-following” – for language, rarely
vision. But I think that is another misunderstanding, one of many in my opinion. It is of some interest to compare qualms expressed today about theories
of language, and aspects of the world “termed mental” more generally, with
debates among leading scientists well into the 1920s as to whether chemistry
was a mere calculating device predicting the results of experiments, or whether
it merits the honorific status of an account of “physical reality,” debates later
understood to be completely pointless. The similarities, which I have discussed
elsewhere, are striking and I think instructive.
Putting these interesting topics aside, if we adopt the biolinguistic perspective, a language is a state of the faculty of language – an I-language in technical
usage, where “I” underscores the fact that the conception is internalist, individual, and intensional (with an “s,” not a “t”) – that is, the actual formulation of
the generative principles, not the set it enumerates; the latter we can think of as
a more abstract property of the I-language, rather as we can think of the set of
possible trajectories of a comet through the solar system as an abstract property
of that system.
The decision to study language as part of the world in this sense was regarded
as highly controversial at the time, and still is, by many linguists as well. It seems
to me that the arguments advanced against the legitimacy of the approach have
little force – a weak thesis; and that its basic assumptions are tacitly adopted
even by those who strenuously reject them – a much stronger thesis. I will not
enter into this chapter of contemporary intellectual history here, but will simply
assume that crucial aspects of language can be studied as part of the natural
world in the sense of the biolinguistic approach that took shape half a century
ago, and has been intensively pursued since, along various different paths.
The language faculty is one component of what the co-founder of modern evolutionary theory, Alfred Russel Wallace, called “man’s intellectual and
moral nature” : the human capacities for creative imagination, language and

176

Language and Mind

other modes of symbolism, mathematics, interpretation and recording of natural phenomena, intricate social practices and the like, a complex of capacities
that seem to have crystallized fairly recently, perhaps a little over 50,000 years
ago, among a small breeding group of which we are all descendants – a complex that sets humans apart rather sharply from other animals, including other
hominids, judging by the archaeological record. The nature of the “human
capacity,” as some researchers now call it, remains a considerable mystery. It
was one element of a famous disagreement between the two founders of the
theory of evolution, with Wallace holding, contrary to Darwin, that evolution of
these faculties cannot be accounted for in terms of variation and natural selection alone, but requires “some other influence, law, or agency,” some principle
of nature alongside gravitation, cohesion, and other forces without which the
material universe could not exist. Although the issues are differently framed
today, they have not disappeared.
It is commonly assumed that whatever the human intellectual capacity is, the
faculty of language is essential to it. Many scientists agree with paleoanthropologist Ian Tattersall, who writes that he is “almost sure that it was the invention
of language” that was the “sudden and emergent” event that was the “releasing
stimulus” for the appearance of the human capacity in the evolutionary record –
the “great leap forward” as Jared Diamond called it, the result of some genetic
event that rewired the brain, allowing for the origin of human language with
the rich syntax that provides a multitude of modes of expression of thought, a
prerequisite for social development and the sharp changes of behavior that are
revealed in the archaeological record, also generally assumed to be the trigger
for the rapid trek from Africa, where otherwise modern humans had apparently
been present for hundreds of thousands of years. The view is similar to that
of the Cartesians, but stronger: they regarded normal use of language as the
clearest empirical evidence that another creature has a mind like ours, but not
the criterial evidence for mind and the origin of the human capacity.
If this general picture has some validity, then the evolution of language may
be a very brief affair, even though it is a very recent product of evolution.
Of course, there are innumerable precursors, and they doubtless had a long
evolutionary history. For example, the bones of the middle ear are a marvellous
sound-amplifying system, wonderfully designed for interpreting speech, but
they appear to have migrated from the reptilian jaw as a mechanical effect of
growth of the neocortex in mammals that began 160 million years ago, so it is
reported. We know far too little about conceptual systems to say much, but it’s
reasonable to suppose that they too had a long history after the separation of
hominids, yielding results with no close similarity elsewhere. But the question of
evolution of language itself has to do with how these various precursors were
organized into the faculty of language, perhaps through some slight genetic
event that brought a crucial innovation. If that is so, then the evolution of

Biolinguistics and the human capacity

177

language itself is brief, speculations that have some bearing on the kind of
inquiry into language that is likely to be productive.
Tattersall takes language to be “virtually synonymous with symbolic
thought.” Elaborating, one of the initiators of the 1974 symposium, Nobel
Laureate François Jacob, observed that “the role of language as a communication system between individuals would have come about only secondarily,”
perhaps referring to discussions at the 1974 conference, where his fellow Nobel
Laureate Salvador Luria was one of the more forceful advocates of the view that
communicative needs would not have provided “any great selective pressure to
produce a system such as language,” with its crucial relation to “development of
abstract or productive thinking.” “The quality of language that makes it unique
does not seem to be so much its role in communicating directives for action” or
other common features of animal communication, Jacob continues, but rather
“its role in symbolizing, in evoking cognitive images,” in “molding” our notion
of reality and yielding our capacity for thought and planning, through its unique
property of allowing “infinite combinations of symbols” and therefore “mental
creation of possible worlds,” ideas that trace back to the seventeeth-century
cognitive revolution.
Jacob also stressed the common understanding that answers to questions
about evolution “in most instances . . . can hardly be more than more or less
reasonable guesses.” And in most cases, hardly even that. An example that is
perhaps of interest here is the study of evolution of the bee communication
system, unusual in that in principle it permits transmission of information over
an infinite (continuous) range. There are hundreds of species of honey and stingless bees, some having variants of communication systems, some not, though
they all seem to survive well enough. So there is plenty of opportunity for
comparative work. Bees are incomparably easier to study than humans, along
every dimension. But little is understood. Even the literature is sparse. The most
recent extensive review I have seen, by entomologist Fred Dyer, notes that even
the basic computational problems of coding spatial information to motor commands, and the reverse for follower bees, remains “puzzling,” and “What sorts
of neural events might underlie these various mapping processes is unknown,”
while evolutionary origins scarcely go beyond speculation. There is nothing
like the huge literature and confident pronouncements about the evolution of
human language – something that one might also find a bit “puzzling.”
We can add another insight of seventeeth-and eighteenth-century philosophy,
with roots as far back as Aristotle’s analysis of what were later interpreted as
mental entities: that even the most elementary concepts of human language do
not relate to mind-independent objects by means of some reference-like relation between symbols and identifiable physical features of the external world,
as seems to be universal in animal communication systems. Rather, they are
creations of the “cognoscitive powers” that provide us with rich means to refer

178

Language and Mind

to the outside world from certain perspectives, but are individuated by mental operations that cannot be reduced to a “peculiar nature belonging” to the
thing we are talking about, as Hume summarized a century of inquiry. Julius
Moravcsik’s “aitiational theory of semantics” is a recent development of some
of these ideas, from their Aristotelian origins and with rich implications for
natural language semantics.
These are critical observations about the elementary semantics of natural
language, suggesting that its most primitive elements are related to the mindindependent world much as the internal elements of phonology are, not by a
reference-like relation but as part of a considerably more intricate species of
conception and action. I cannot try to elaborate here, but I think such considerations, if seriously pursued, reveal that it is idle to try to base the semantics
of natural language on any kind of “word–object” relation, however intricate
the constructed notion of “object,” just as it would be idle to base the phonetics
of natural language on a “symbol–sound” relation, where sounds are taken to
be constructed physical events – perhaps indescribable four-dimensional constructs based on motions of molecules, with further questions dispatched to the
physics department, or if one wants to make the problem still more hopeless,
to the sociology department as well. It is universally agreed that these moves
are the wrong ones for the study of the sound side of language, and I think
the conclusions are just as reasonable on the meaning side. For each utterance,
there is a physical event, but that does not imply that we have to seek some
mythical relation between such an internal object as the syllable [ta] and an
identifiable mind-independent event; and for each act of referring there is some
complex aspect of the experienced or imagined world on which attention is
focused by that act, but that is not to say that a relation of reference exists for
natural language. I think it does not, even at the most primitive level.
If this much is generally on the right track, then, at least two basic problems
arise when we consider the origins of the faculty of language and its role in the
sudden emergence of the human intellectual capacity: first, the core semantics of
minimal meaning-bearing elements, including the simplest of them; and second,
the principles that allow unbounded combinations of symbols, hierarchically
organized, which provide the means for use of language in its many aspects. By
the same token, the core theory of language – universal grammar, UG – must
provide, first, a structured inventory of possible lexical items that are related to
or perhaps identical with the concepts that are the elements of the “cognoscitive
powers” and second, means to construct from these lexical items the infinite
variety of internal structures that enter into thought, interpretation, planning,
and other human mental acts, and are sometimes externalized, a secondary
process if the speculations just reviewed turn out to be correct. On the first
problem, the apparently human-specific conceptual–lexical apparatus, there
is insightful work on relational notions linked to syntactic structures and on

Biolinguistics and the human capacity

179

the partially mind-internal objects that appear to play a critical role (events,
propositions, etc.). But there is little beyond descriptive remarks on the core
referential apparatus that is used to talk about the world. The second problem
has been central to linguistic research for a half-century, with a long history
before in different terms.
The biolinguistic approach adopted from the outset the point of view that
cognitive neuroscientist R. G. Gallistel calls “the norm in neuroscience” today,
the “modular view of learning”: the conclusion that in all animals, learning is
based on specialized mechanisms, “instincts to learn” in specific ways. He
suggests that we think of these mechanisms as “organs within the brain,”
achieving states in which they perform specific kinds of computation. Apart
from “extremely hostile environments,” they change states under the triggering
and shaping effect of external factors, more or less reflexively, and in accordance with internal design. That is the “process of learning,” though “growth”
might be a more appropriate term, avoiding misleading connotations of the term
“learning.” One might relate these ideas to Gallistel’s encyclopedic work on
organization of motion, based on “structural constraints” that set “limits on the
kinds of solutions an animal will come up with in a learning situation.”
The modular view of learning of course does not entail that the components
of the module are unique to it: at some level, everyone assumes that they are
not – the cell, for example. The question of the level of organization at which
unique properties emerge remains a basic question from a biological point of
view, as it was at the 1974 conference. Gallistel’s observations recall the concept
of “canalization” introduced into evolutionary and developmental biology by
C. H. Waddington sixty years ago, referring to processes “adjusted so as to
bring about one definite end result regardless of minor variations in conditions
during the course of the reaction,” thus ensuring “the production of the normal,
that is optimal type in the face of the unavoidable hazards of existence.” That
seems to be a fair description of the growth of language in the individual. A core
problem of the study of the faculty of language is to discover the mechanisms
that limit outcomes to “optimal types.”
It has been recognized since the origins of modern biology that organismexternal developmental constraints and architectural-structural principles enter
not only into the growth of organisms but also their evolution. In a classic
contemporary paper, Maynard Smith and associates trace the post-Darwinian
version back to Thomas Huxley, who was struck by the fact that there appear to
be “predetermined lines of modification” that lead natural selection to “produce
varieties of a limited number and kind” for every species. They review a variety of such constraints in the organic world and describe how “limitations on
phenotypic variability” are “caused by the structure, character, composition, or
dynamics of the developmental system.” They also point out that such “developmental constraints undoubtedly play a significant role in evolution” though

180

Language and Mind

there is yet “little agreement on their importance as compared with selection,
drift, and other such factors in shaping evolutionary history.” At about the
same time, Jacob wrote that “the rules controlling embryonic development,”
almost entirely unknown, interact with other physical factors to “restrict possible changes of structures and functions” in evolutionary development, providing
“architectural constraints” that “limit adaptive scope and channel evolutionary
patterns,” to quote a recent review. The best-known of the figures who devoted
much of their work to these topics are D’Arcy Thompson and Alan Turing, who
took a very strong view on the central role of such factors in biology. In recent
years, such considerations have been adduced for a wide range of problems of
development and evolution, from cell division in bacteria to optimization of
structure and function of cortical networks, even to proposals that organisms
have “the best of all possible brains,” as argued by computational neuroscientist
Chris Cherniak. The problems are the border of inquiry, but their significance
is not controversial.
Assuming that the faculty of language has the general properties of other
biological systems, we should, therefore, be seeking three factors that enter
into the growth of language in the individual:
(1) Genetic factors, apparently near uniform for the species, the topic of UG.
The genetic endowment interprets part of the environment as linguistic
experience, a nontrivial task that the infant carries out reflexively, and
determines the general course of the development of the language faculty
to the languages attained.
(2) Experience, which leads to variation, within a fairly narrow range, as in the
case of other subsystems of the human capacity and the organism generally.
(3) Principles not specific to the faculty of language.
The third factor includes principles of structural architecture that restrict outcomes, including principles of efficient computation, which would be expected
to be of particular significance for computational systems such as language,
determining the general character of attainable languages.
One can trace interest in this third factor back to the Galilean intuition that
“nature is perfect,” from the tides to the flight of birds, and that it is the task
of the scientist to discover in just what sense this is true. Newton’s confidence
that Nature must be “very simple” reflects the same intuition. However obscure
it may be, that intuition about what Ernst Haeckel called nature’s “drive for
the beautiful” (“Sinn fuer das Schoene”) has been a guiding theme of modern
science ever since its modern origins.
Biologists have tended to think differently about the objects of their inquiry,
adopting Jacob’s image of nature as a tinkerer, which does the best it can
with materials at hand – often a pretty poor job, as human intelligence seems
to be intent on demonstrating about itself. British geneticist Gabriel Dover
captures the prevailing view when he concludes that “biology is a strange and

Biolinguistics and the human capacity

181

messy business and ‘perfection’ is the last word one would use to describe how
organisms work, particularly for anything produced by natural selection” –
though produced only in part by natural selection, as he emphasizes, and as
every biologist knows, and to an extent that cannot be quantified by available
tools. These expectations make good sense for systems with a long and complex
evolutionary history, with plenty of accidents, lingering effects of evolutionary
history that lead to nonoptimal solutions of problems, and so on. But the logic
does not apply to relatively sudden emergence, which might very well lead to
systems that are unlike the complex outcomes of millions of years of Jacobian
“bricolage,” perhaps more like snowflakes, or phyllotaxis, or cell division into
spheres rather than cubes, or polyhedra as construction materials, or much else
that is found in the natural world. The minimalist program is motivated by the
suspicion that something like that may indeed be true for human language, and
I think recent work has given some reason to believe that language is in many
respects an optimal solution to conditions it must satisfy, far more so than could
have been anticipated a few years ago.
Returning to the early days, within the structuralist/behaviorist frameworks
of the 1950s, the closest analogues to UG were the procedural approaches developed by Trubetzkoy, Harris, and others, devised to determine linguistic units
and their patterns from a corpus of linguistic data. At best, these cannot reach
very far, no matter how vast the corpus and futuristic the computational devices
used. Even the elementary formal and meaning-bearing elements, morphemes,
do not have the “beads on a string” character that is required for procedural
approaches, but relate much more indirectly to phonetic form. Their nature
and properties are fixed within the more abstract computational system that
determines the unbounded range of expressions. The earliest approaches to
generative grammar therefore assumed that the genetic endowment provides a
format for rule systems and a method for selecting the optimal instantiation of
it, given data of experience. Specific proposals were made then and in the years
that followed. In principle, they provided a possible solution to the problem of
language acquisition, but involved astronomical calculation, and therefore did
not seriously address the issues.
The main concerns in those years were quite different, as they still are. It may
be hard to believe today, but it was commonly assumed fifty years ago that the
basic technology of linguistic description was available, and that language variation was so free that nothing of much generality was likely to be discovered. As
soon as efforts were made to provide fairly explicit accounts of the properties of
languages, it immediately became obvious how little was known, in any domain.
Every specific proposal yielded a treasure trove of counter-evidence, requiring
complex and varied rule systems even to achieve a very limited approximation
to descriptive adequacy. That was highly stimulating for inquiry into language,
but also left a serious quandary, since the most elementary considerations led to

182

Language and Mind

the conclusion that UG must impose narrow constraints on possible outcomes in
order to account for the acquisition of language, the task of achieving “explanatory adequacy,” so called. Sometimes these are called “poverty of stimulus”
problems in the study of language, though the term is misleading because this
is just a special case of basic issues that arise universally for organic growth,
including cognitive growth, a variant of problems recognized as far back as
Plato.
A number of paths were pursued to try to resolve the tension. The most
successful turned out to be efforts to formulate general principles, attributed
to UG – that is, the genetic endowment – leaving a somewhat reduced residue
of phenomena that would result, somehow, from experience. These approaches
had some success, but the basic tensions remained unresolved at the time of the
1974 conference.
Within a few years, the landscape changed considerably. In part this was the
result of a vast array of new materials from studies of much greater depth than
previously, in part from opening new topics to investigation. About twenty-five
years ago, much of this work crystallized in a radically different approach to
UG, the “Principles and Parameters” (P&P) framework, which for the first time
offered the hope of overcoming the tension between descriptive and explanatory
adequacy. This approach sought to eliminate the format framework entirely, and
with it, the traditional conception of rules and constructions that had been pretty
much taken over into generative grammar. In these respects, it was a much more
radical departure from the rich tradition of 2,500 years than early generative
grammar. The new P&P framework led to an explosion of inquiry into languages of the most varied typology, leading to new problems previously not
envisioned, sometimes answers, and the reinvigoration of neighboring disciplines concerned with acquisition and processing, their guiding questions now
reframed in terms of parameter-setting within a fixed system of principles of
UG. No one familiar with the field has any illusion today that the horizons of
inquiry are even visible, let alone at hand.
Abandonment of the format framework also had a significant impact on
the biolinguistic program. If, as had been assumed, acquisition is a matter of
selection among options made available by the format provided by UG, then
the format must be rich and highly articulated, allowing relatively few options;
otherwise, explanatory adequacy is out of reach. The best theory of language
must be a very unsatisfactory one from other points of view, with a complex array
of conditions specific to human language, restricting possible instantiations.
The fundamental biological issue of principled explanation could barely be
contemplated, and correspondingly, the prospects for some serious inquiry into
evolution of language were dim; evidently, the more varied and intricate the
conditions specific to language, the less hope there is for a reasonable account
of the evolutionary origins of UG. These are among the questions that were

Biolinguistics and the human capacity

183

raised at the 1974 symposium and others of the period, but they were left as
apparently irresoluble problems.
The P&P framework offered prospects for resolution of these tensions as
well. Insofar as this framework proves valid, acquisition is a matter of parameter setting, and is therefore divorced entirely from the remaining format for
grammar: the principles of UG. There is no longer a conceptual barrier to the
hope that the UG might be reduced to a much simpler form, and that basic
properties of the computational systems of language might have a principled
explanation instead of being stipulated in terms of a highly restrictive languagespecific format for grammars. Returning to the three factors of language design,
adoption of a P&P framework overcomes a difficult conceptual barrier to shifting the burden of explanation from factor (1), the genetic endowment, to factor
(3), language-independent principles of structural architecture and computational efficiency, thereby providing some answers to the fundamental questions
of biology of language, its nature and use, and perhaps its evolution.
With the conceptual barriers imposed by the format framework overcome, we
can try more realistically to sharpen the question of what constitutes a principled
explanation for properties of language, and turn to one of the most fundamental
questions of the biology of language: to what extent does language approximate
an optimal solution to conditions that it must satisfy to be usable at all, given
extra-linguistic structural architecture? These conditions take us back to the
traditional characterization of language since Aristotle as a system that links
sound and meaning. In our terms, the expressions generated by a language must
satisfy two interface conditions: those imposed by the sensorimotor system and
by the conceptual–intentional system that enters into the human intellectual
capacity and the variety of speech acts.
We can regard an explanation of properties of language as principled insofar
as it can be reduced to properties of the interface systems and general considerations of computational efficiency and the like. Independently, the interface
systems can be studied on their own, including comparative study that has been
productively underway. And the same is true of principles of efficient computation, applied to language in recent work by many investigators with important
results, and perhaps also amenable to comparative inquiry. In a variety of ways,
then, it is possible both to clarify and to address some of the basic problems of
the biology of language.
At this point we have to move on to more technical discussion than is possible
here, but a few informal remarks may help sketch the general landscape, at least.
An elementary fact about the language faculty is that it is a system of discrete infinity, rare in the organic world. Any such system is based on a primitive
operation that takes objects already constructed, and constructs from them a
new object: in the simplest case, the set containing them. Call that operation
Merge. Either Merge or some equivalent is a minimal requirement. With Merge

184

Language and Mind

available, we instantly have an unbounded system of hierarchically structured
expressions. The simplest account of the “Great Leap Forward” in the evolution
of humans would be that the brain was rewired, perhaps by some slight mutation, to provide the operation Merge, at once laying a core part of the basis for
what is found at that dramatic moment of human evolution: at least in principle;
to connect the dots is far from a trivial problem. There are speculations about
the evolution of language that postulate a far more complex process: first some
mutation that permits two-unit expressions, perhaps yielding selectional advantage by reducing memory load for lexical items; then further mutations to permit
larger ones; and finally the Great Leap that yields Merge. Perhaps the earlier
steps really took place, though there is no empirical or serious conceptual argument for the belief. A more parsimonious speculation is that they did not, and
that the Great Leap was effectively instantaneous, in a single individual, who
was instantly endowed with intellectual capacities far superior to those of others, transmitted to offspring and coming to predominate. At best a reasonable
guess, as are all speculations about such matters, but about the simplest one
imaginable, and not inconsistent with anything known or plausibly surmised. It
is hard to see what account of human evolution would not assume at least this
much, in one or another form.
Similar questions arise about growth of language in the individual. It is
commonly assumed that there is a two-word stage, a three-word stage, and
so on, with an ultimate Great Leap Forward to unbounded generation. That is
observed in performance, but it is also observed that at the early stage the child
understands much more complex expressions, and that random modification
of longer ones – even such simple changes as placement of function words
in a manner inconsistent with UG or the adult language – leads to confusion
and misinterpretation. It could be that unbounded Merge, and whatever else
is involved in UG, is present at once, but only manifested in limited ways
for extraneous reasons, memory and attention limitation and the like; matters
discussed at the 1974 symposium, and now possible to investigate much more
systematically and productively.
The most restrictive case of Merge applies to a single object, forming a singleton set. Restriction to this case yields the successor function, from which the
rest of the theory of natural numbers can be developed in familiar ways. That
suggests a possible answer to a problem that troubled Wallace in the late nineteenth century: in his words, that the “gigantic development of the mathematical
capacity is wholly unexplained by the theory of natural selection, and must be
due to some altogether distinct cause,” if only because it remained unused. One
possibility is that the natural numbers result from a simple constraint on the
language faculty, hence not given by God, in accord with Kronecker’s famous
aphorism, though the rest is created by man, as he continued. Speculations
about the origin of the mathematical capacity as an abstraction from linguistic

Biolinguistics and the human capacity

185

operations are not unfamiliar. There are apparent problems, including dissociation with lesions and diversity of localization, but the significance of such
phenomena is unclear for many reasons (including the issue of possession vs.
use of the capacity). There may be something to these speculations, perhaps
along the lines just indicated.
Elementary considerations of computational efficiency impose other conditions on the optimal solution to the task of linking sound and meaning. There
is by now extensive literature exploring problems of this kind, and I think it is
fair to say that there has been considerable progress in moving towards principled explanation. It is even more clear that these efforts have met one primary
requirement for a sensible research program: stimulating inquiry that has been
able to overcome some old problems while even more rapidly bringing to light
new ones, previously unrecognized and scarcely even formulable, and enriching
greatly the empirical challenges of descriptive and explanatory adequacy that
have to be faced; and for the first time, opening a realistic prospect of moving
significantly beyond explanatory adequacy to principled explanation along the
lines indicated.
The quest for principled explanation faces daunting tasks. We can formulate
the goals with reasonable clarity. We cannot, of course, know in advance how
well they can be attained – that is, to what extent the states of the language
faculty are attributable to general principles, possibly even holding for organisms generally. With each step toward this goal, we gain a clearer grasp of the
core properties that are specific to the language faculty, still leaving quite unresolved problems that have been raised for hundreds of years. Among these are
the question how properties “termed mental” relate to “the organical structure
of the brain,” problems far from resolution even for insects, and with unique
and deeply mysterious aspects when we consider the human capacity and its
evolutionary origins.

Index

A-over-A principle 45–48, 49, 50
abduction xvi–xvii, 80, 81, 84, 152
active and passive transformations 136
Akmajian, Adrian 96
Alsop, Joseph 84
ambiguity 28–32, 134
American Academy of Arts and Sciences 174
animal communication 9–10, 60, 61, 72, 177
and human language 10, 59–60, 88–91
Ardrey, Robert 84
Aristotle 177, 183
Austin, J. L. 143
automata 3, 4, 5, 161
Barlow, H.B. 83
behavioral sciences x, 57
behavioralist approaches to the study of
language 22, 181
and linguistics vii, 146, 162
psychology and 21, 63
belief 150
Bever, T. G. 82–83
biolinguistics 173–85
Bloomfield, Leonard 2, 13
Bower, Thomas 83
canalization 179
Cartesian philosophers 5–6, 22
animal behavior 11
contribution of 6
mind, problems of 7, 11–12, 176
categorial features of universal grammar 114,
124, 125–27, 128, 131, 137, 138
phonetic 114
syntactic 124, 125–27, 128, 130, 131, 137,
138
Cherniak, Chris 180
cognitive sciences xiv–xvi, xvii, 149
Cohen, I. Bernard 174
communication
animal 9–10, 59–60, 61, 72, 177
mathematical theory of 3, 4

186

confirmation, problem of 79
conservation (of volume) 82–83
Cordemoy, Géraud de 5–6
creative aspect of language use 6, 8, 9, 87,
88–91, 175
Descartes on 10, 89
mechanisms enabling 90
Cudworth, Ralph 159
culture 69
cyclic application, principle of 39–42, 49, 66,
116–19, 141, 154, 160
Darwin, Charles xv, 173, 176
deep structure x, 15, 25, 93, 94, 97, 140
base phrase-markers and 131
character of 32
functions of 26
and labeled bracketing 122
and meaning 94, 97, 146
and pronominalization 97
relation to surface structure 15, 27, 62, 135,
137, 138, 144
rules generating 124
and semantic interpretation 111, 120, 123,
131, 145
and syntax 123
theory of 15–16, 17
and transformations 134, 135, 137, 138,
144, 145
and universal syntax 137
variation from language to language
66–67, 140
Delbrük, Berthold 18
deletion transformations 31, 49, 50–52
derivations 127, 128, 129
Descartes, Rene 7
innate ideas 71, 73–74, 153, 154, 159, 167
language xv, 9–12, 89
mind 5, 6
Diamond, Jared 176
dispositions 31, 33
Dougherty, Ray 96

Index
Dover, Gabriel 180
Du Marsais, César Chesneau 16
Dyer, Fred 177
Eden, Murray 86
ellipsis 16, 17
emergence 62, 178, 181
Emonds, Joseph 53
empiricism, resourceful 171, 172
English 118, 140
stress assignment 116–19, 141
vowel shifts 36, 42
wh- questions 43–45
erasure principle 50–52, 53
ethology, comparative 83, 85
evolution 59, 177
‘Great Leap Forward’ account 184
of language 59, 176, 184
explanation 14, 22, 23, 27, 182
principled 182, 183, 185
rational 13–14
explanatory theory 23, 24–25, 146, 166, 175
extraposition 45
Fant, G. 108
Ferster, C. B. 58
formatives 113, 114, 115
Fraser, A. C. 71, 153
Galanter, E. 105
Gallistel, R. G. 179
generative grammar x, 62, 77, 78, 82, 91, 112,
113
acquisition of 151
construction of 150
elements of 97–98
form of 142
and language acquisition 165
and linguistic competence 64, 68, 86, 165,
166
principles 175
semantic component 123
theory of 63, 91, 140, 145
transformational 86, 93
Ginsburg, S. 75
Goodman, Nelson 70, 71–74, 77, 149,
153–58, 159
grammar 23, 91, 111, 138
see also universal grammar
components of 62, 107–10, 111, 113–38,
139
definition 150
and innate ideas 170
and linguistic competence 103
perception of 38, 39

187
philosophical 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 57, 66–67
phrase structure 160
properties of 27, 104
requirements of 15
rules of 28, 92, 126, 127, 137
simplicity and 168
structure of 113–38
transformational-generative 75, 91, 93
universal: see universal grammar
grammatical relations 122
grammatical transformations 25–26, 93, 97,
133, 138, 144
A-over-A principle 45–48, 49, 50
active–passive 136
conditions on 49, 52, 53, 62
cyclic application of 41, 49
deletion 31, 49, 50–52
erasure principle 50–52, 53
extraposition 45
Merge 183, 184
nature of 52, 161
and phrase-markers 133, 139
rules of 132
sequence of 134
simplicity and 162
structure-dependent 51, 54, 55
and syntactic rules 124, 132, 137
gravity 7, 174
habits 31, 33, 105
Haeckel, Ernst 180
Halle, M. 34, 66, 108, 114, 116, 142, 155
Harman, Gilbert 149, 167, 172
Harris, Zellig 29, 172, 181
Herbert, Lord 71, 153, 167
Hiz, Henry 29, 149, 164–68
Hockett, C. F. 134
Huarte, Juan xiv, xvi, 8–9, 17
Hubel, David 83
Hull, Clark 171
human action, theory of 64
human capacity 99–100, 173–85
Humboldt, Wilhelm von xv, 15, 18, 62, 67,
113
Hume, David xv, 154, 173, 178
Huxley, Thomas 179
induction 80
information, concept of 3
innate ideas 70, 77, 78, 80, 83, 85, 158
comprehensibility of the notion 158
Goodman 73, 154
Locke 71, 153
Putnam 77, 160
instinct 85

188

Index

intelligence xi, 8–9, 69, 99, 152
and language 9, 61, 176, 178
intonation 95–96
see also stress assignment in English
Jackendoff, Ray 96
Jacob, François 177, 180
Jacobs, R. 27, 41
Jakobson, R. 65, 108, 109
Joos, Martin xiii, 67, 68
junctures 113, 114, 115
Katz, J. 27, 52, 109, 110, 142
Kimball, J. P. 161
knowledge 69, 166
acquisition of 152, 153, 154, 159,
171
and experience 68, 70
knowing how and knowing that 169
problems of 147, 149, 153, 159
Köhler, Wolfgang 21, 23–26
Kronecker, Leopold 184
La Forge, L. de 5, 12
labeled bracketing 127, 129, 136, 144
Lange, Friedrich xv
language x, 24, 61, 87, 88–101, 167
and animal communication 10, 59–60, 72,
88–91
characteristics of 60, 183
common origin of 76, 162–63, 168
discreteness of 108, 183
evolution of 59, 176, 184
faculty of 24, 175, 178, 180, 183
general properties of 102
knowledge of 22, 23, 25, 26, 33, 62, 98,
102
see also linguistic competence
and mental organization 9, 61, 100
nature of 5, 102–42, 148
organization of 90, 91
properties of 74, 92, 107, 108, 118, 181
rationalist theory of 9, 12, 25, 67, 68, 70,
77, 99, 171–72
structuralist approaches to the study of 22
study of 1, 19, 22, 58, 98, 100
theory of 182
unboundedness of 105, 108
written system for 138
language acquisition xi, 58, 141, 151–52,
154, 163, 181
explanations for 78, 79, 99–100, 142
factors involved 180, 183
first language 71, 154, 155–56
innate basis for 87, 119, 162, 170

model of 106, 120, 159, 165, 171
Peirce on 79–82
poverty of stimulus xvii, 11
second languages 72, 154–55, 156
stages of 184
theory of 166
and universal grammar 33, 77, 120
language structure
and generative grammar 112, 142
study of x, 110, 111
theory of 12, 103, 139, 148, 151
Lashley, Karl 60
Le Grand, Antoine 90
learning xi, 64, 164
and generative grammar 63, 69, 151
model of 150, 151
modular view of 179
strategies 76, 163, 164
theory of 79, 81, 152, 166
Lees, R. B. 30, 142
Leibnitz, Gottfried Wilhelm 7, 71
Lenneberg, Eric ix, 82, 163, 173
Lettvin, J. 83
Lévi-Strauss, C. 65, 66
lexicon 34–35, 124–25, 128, 130, 131
linguistic competence 4, 20, 62, 102–04, 165,
169
concept of 63, 69
and grammar 16, 27, 54, 55, 56, 64, 136,
166
and knowing how 169
model for 104
and performance 102–04, 139, 164–68
study of 66, 76, 98, 104–06, 166
linguistics vii, xi
achievements of 146
anthropological 68, 140
appropriateness 11
coherence 11
comparative studies 18
deep structure 140
explanation 14, 24
mathematical 62–63
methodology 3, 17, 20, 146, 165
object of xiv
and philosophy 1, 9, 143–72
Principles and Parameters approach xviii,
182, 183
and psychology 1, 67, 78
rationalist theory of 167, 170
structural 3, 4, 17, 19–20, 22, 57, 65, 106
and universal grammar xvii
Locke, John xv, 71, 73, 153, 154, 174
Lorenz, Konrad 84–85
Luria, Salvador 177

Index
mathematics 176, 184, 185
Matthews, G. H. 161, 167
meaning 88–101, 133, 143
see also semantic interpretation
and deep structure 94, 97
and surface structure 96, 97
Mehler, J. 82–83
mental processes xv, 21, 153, 173, 177, 185
Merge operation 183, 184
Miller, G. A. 55, 81, 105, 162
mind 5, 85, 90, 164, 174
evolution of 86
linguistic contributions to the study of
1–20, 21–56, 57–87
other minds 9
philosophy of 172
problems of 25, 57, 167
rationalist theory of 99, 171–72
Minsky, M. 82
Moracvsik, Julius 178
Mountcastle, Vernon 174
Nelson, R. J. 75
Newton, Isaac 7, 174, 180
nominalization 93, 94, 155
numbers, natural 184

189
phrase-markers 130, 137, 139
base phrase-markers 127, 131, 137
phrase structure 14, 74, 75, 115, 125, 160
rules 75, 127, 161, 162
physics 7
Piaget, J. 82
poetry 90
Polignac, Melchior de 10
Popper, Karl 59
Port-Royal Grammar and Logic 13, 14–15,
16, 17
Postal, P. 27, 34, 142
predicate-of relation 122
presupposition 95, 96
Pribram, K. H. 105
Priestley, Joseph 173, 174
Principles and Parameters approach to
linguistics xviii, 182, 183
pronominalization 96, 97
proper names 160
psychic distance 23, 55, 69
psychology 6, 14, 21, 63, 68, 79, 104
and intelligence 98
and linguistics 1, 64, 67, 78, 82, 100
rationalist 25, 167
stimulus–response 2, 3, 4
Putnam, Hilary 70, 74–77, 149, 159–64

other minds, problem of 9
Quine, W. V. O. xiii, 63, 171
Papert, S. 82
Peirce, Charles Sanders xvi–xvii, 79–82, 84,
85, 152
perception, role of belief in 150
perceptual model 103–04, 106, 118, 119,
149–50
performance 102, 139, 151, 166, 171
Perlmutter, David 51
Peters, S. 161
philosophical grammar 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 57,
66–67
philosophy
analytic 145
Cartesian 5–6, 7, 22
and linguistics 1, 143
of language 57–58
of mind 22
phonetic representation 37, 38, 97, 103
categorial features 114
formatives 113, 114, 115
junctures 113, 114, 115
and surface structure 94, 113, 116
phonetics, universal 107–09
phonological rules 35–38, 65, 66, 114, 115
cyclic application of 40
ordering of 116

Racine, Louis 10
reductive principles 174
redundancy rules 125
refernential opacity 145, 146
Reid, Thomas 154, 167
rigidty principle 175
Ritchie, R. 161
romanticism 9, 67, 99
Rosenbaum, Peter S. 27, 41, 50–51, 53, 142
Rosenfield, Leonora Cohen 10
Ross, John 29, 30, 43, 49
Rousseau, J.-J. 67
rule-following 175
Russell, Bertrand 2, 174
Ryle, Gilbert 12
Salzinger, K. 81
Sanctius 16, 17, 18
Saussure, Ferdinand de 17–18, 20
Schlegel, A. W. 90
Schützenberger, M. P. 86
science, seventeenth century developments in
5, 7, 8, 14, 71, 177
semantic interpretation 97, 111, 123, 137,
145, 178

190

Index

semantic interpretation (cont.)
and deep structure 136
and phonetic representation 103
rules of 52, 53
and surface structure 94
universal 53
semantic representation 110, 120, 121
Shklovsky, Viktor 21
simplicity 160, 161, 162, 168, 180
skills 31
Skinner, B.F. 2, 81
Smith, J. Maynard 179
sound–meaning relation 91, 106
sound structure 33–34, 74
stress assignment in English 95–96, 116–19,
141
structural linguistics 3, 4, 17, 19–20, 22, 57,
65, 106
structure-dependent rules 54, 55
surface structure 15, 25, 92–93, 97, 114
character of 32, 33
generation of 34, 124, 143, 144, 145,
161
and grammatical transformations 67, 162
and labeled bracketing 115
and meaning 96, 136, 146
and phonetic representation 94, 116
relation to deep structure 15, 27, 62, 131,
135, 137, 145
syntax and 123
theory of 15–16, 17
variation in 140
symbolism 176, 177
syntactic rules 34, 132, 138
syntax, universal 113, 123–38
Tattersal, Ian 176, 177
teaching 89
terminal symbols 126, 127
Thompson, D’Arcy 180
Thorpe, W. H. 59–60
Tolman, Edward 79
transparency 47, 48
Troubetzky, N. 65, 181
Turing, Alan 180

universal grammar x, 13, 24, 106–13, 178,
181
A-over-A principle 46
characteristics of 158
components of 138
conditions on 68
definition 112
discovery of xvii
evidence for 99, 167
evolution of 182
and experience 182
hypotheses of 140
and innate ideas 74, 77, 141, 170
innate representation of 76, 164
and language acquisition 100, 182, 184
and learning 77
and particular grammar 24, 38, 42, 56
principles of 55, 62, 120, 140, 168
problems of 28
properties of 157
seventeenth century developments in 99
simplicity 183
theory of 142, 166
universal phonetics 107–09, 112, 113–20,
123, 160
distinctive features 108, 109
universal semantics 53, 87, 107, 109–10, 112,
120–23, 145
universal syntax 113, 123–38
Vaugelas, rule of 13
Vendler, Zeno 51, 143, 146
von Neumann, John 3
vowel shifts 36, 42
Waddington, C. H. 179
Wallace, Alfred Russell 175, 176, 184
Weinreich, U. 52, 109
Whitehead, A. N. 20
Whitney, William Dwight 18, 66, 67
Wiest, W. M. 63
Wilkins, Bishop 107
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 22, 63
Yngve, V. 139


